---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 36-58."
chapter_order: 183
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 36.—Artemisia, Parthenis, Botrys, or Ambrosia: Five Remedies.

Women too have even affected an ambition to give their name to plants: thus, for instance, Artemisia, the wife of King Mausolus, adopted the plant, which before was known by the name of “parthenis.” There are some persons, however, who are of opinion that it received this surname from the goddess Artemis Ilithyia, [Artemis or Diana, the guardian of pregnant women.] from the fact of its being used for the cure of female complaints more particularly. It is a plant with numerous branches, like those of wormwood, but the leaves of it are larger and substantial.

There are two varieties of it; one has broader [Probably the Artemisia chamæmelifolia, Camomile-leaved mugwort. The A. arborescens, the Tree-wormwood is named by Littré.] leaves than the other, [Either the Artemisia Pontica of Linnæus, Little wormwood, or Roman wormwood, or else A. campestris of Linnæus, Field southern-wood.] which last is of a slender form, with a more diminutive leaf, and grows nowhere but in maritime districts.

Some persons again, give this name to a plant [Identified with the Artemisia camphorata of Linnæus, Camphorated mugwort.] which grows more inland, with a single stem, extremely diminutive leaves, and numerous blossoms which open at the ripening of the grape, and the odour of which is far from unpleasant. In addition to this name, this last plant is known as “botrys” to some persons, and “ambrosia” to others: [Quite a different plant. See B. xxvii. c. 11.] it grows in Cappadocia.

### Chap. 37.—Nymphæa, Heracleon, Rhopalon, or Madon; Two Varieties of It: Four Remedies.

The plant called “nymphæa,” owes its name, they say, to a Nymph who died of jealousy conceived on account of Hercules, for which reason it is also known as “heracleon” by some. By other persons, again, it is called “rhopalon,” from the resemblance of its root to a club. [Judging from the text of Dioscorides, a passage has been probably lost here, to the effect that “it is taken in drink by persons troubled with lascivious dreams.”] \* \* \* \* and hence it is that those who take it in drink become impotent for some twelve days, and incapacitated for procreation. That of the first quality is found in Orchomenia and at Marathon: the people of Bœotia call it “madon,” and use the seed for food. It grows in spots covered with water; the leaves [Identified with the Nymphæa alba of Linnæus, the White-flowered nymphæa.] of it are large, and float upon the surface, while others are to be seen springing from the roots below. The flower is very similar to a lily in appearance, and after the plant has shed its blossom, the place of the flower is occupied by a head like that of the poppy. The stem is slender, and the plant is usually cut in autumn. The root, of a swarthy hue, is dried in the sun; garlic [“Adversatur ei allium.” A corrupt reading, in all probability.] manifests a peculiar antipathy to it.

There is another [The Nuphar lutea of Sibthorp; the Yellow-flowered nymphæa, or Nenuphar.] nymphæa also, which grows in the river Peneus, in Thessaly: the root of it is white, and the head yellow, about the size of a rose.

### Chap. 38.—Two Varieties of Euphorbia: Four Remedies. The Chamelæa.

In the time, too, of our fathers, King Juba discovered [See B. v. c. i.] a plant, to which he gave the name of “euphorbia,” in honour of his physician, Euphorbus, the brother of the same Musa, whom we have mentioned [In B. xix. c. 38.] as having saved the life of the late Emperor Augustus. It was these brothers who introduced the practice of douching the body with large quantities of cold water, immediately after the bath, for the purpose of bracing the system: whereas in former times, as we find stated in the works of Homer [Il. xii. 444.] even, it was the practice to wash the body with warm water only. With reference to euphorbia, [The Euphorbia officinarum of Linnæus, Officinal spurge.] there is a treatise still in existence, written upon it by King Juba, in which he highly extols its merits; he discovered it growing upon Mount Atlas, and describes it as resembling a thyrsus in appearance, and bearing leaves like those of the acanthus. [An incorrect statement, as Fée remarks.]

The properties of this plant are so remarkably powerful, [Its odour, Fée says, is not so strong as Pliny would have us believe.] that the persons engaged in collecting the juices of it are obliged to stand at a considerable distance. The incisions are made with a long pole shod with iron, the juice flowing into receivers of kid-leather placed beneath. The juice has all the appearance of milk, as it exudes, but when it has coagulated and dried, it assumes the form and consistency of frankincense. The persons engaged in collecting it, find their sight improved [On the contrary, Fée observes, it would be not unlikely to produce ophthalmia of the most obstinate kind.] thereby. This juice is an excellent remedy for the stings of serpents: in whatever part of the body the wound may have been inflicted, the practice is to make an incision in the crown of the head, and there introduce the medicament. The Gætuli who collect it, are in the habit of adulterating it with warm milk; [This Fée considers to be almost impracticable.] a fraud, however, easily to be detected by the agency of fire, that which is not genuine emitting a most disgusting smell.

Much inferior to this is the juice extracted, in Gaul, [Cisalpine Gaul.] from the chamelæa, [See B. xiii. c. 35.] a plant which bears the grain of Cnidos. When broken asunder, it resembles hammoniacum [See B. xii. c. 49, B. xxiv. c. 14, and B. xxxi. c. 39.] in appearance; and however slightly tasted, it leaves a burning sensation in the mouth, which lasts a considerable time, and increases every now and then, until, in fact, it has quite parched the fauces.

### Chap. 39. (8.)—Two Varieties of the Plantago: Forty-six Remedies.

The physician Themiso, too, has conferred some celebrity upon the plantago, otherwise a very common plant; indeed he has written a treatise upon it, as though he had been the first to discover it. There are two varieties; one, more diminutive [The Plantago lagopus of Linnæus, according to Sibthorp; but Sprengel identifies it with the Plantago lanceolata of Linnæus, or else the P. maritima.] than the other, has a narrower and more swarthy leaf, strongly resembling a sheep’s tongue in appearance: the stem of it is angular and bends downwards, and it is generally found growing in meadow lands. The larger [The Plantago altissima or major of modern botany.] kind has leaves enclosed with ribs at the sides, to all appearance, from the fact of which being seven [I.e. the ribs, nerves, or sinews of the leaf.] in number, the plant has been called “heptapleuron” [“Seven-sided.”] by some. The stem of it is a cubit in height, and strongly resembles that of the turnip. That which is grown in a moist soil is considered much the most efficacious: it is possessed of marvellous virtues as a desiccative and as an astringent, and has all the effect of a cautery. There is nothing that so effectually arrests the fluxes known by the Greeks as “rheumatismi.”

### Chap. 40.—Buglossos: Three Remedies.

To an account of the plantago may be annexed that of the buglossos, the leaf of which resembles an ox tongue. [Whence its name, from the Greek. Sprengel and Desfontaines identify it with the Borrago officinalis of Linnæus, our Borage. Littré gives the Anchusa Italica.] The main peculiarity of this plant is, that if put into wine, it promotes [Though Pliny’s assertion is supported by the authority of the School of Salerno, Fée treats it as entirely unfounded. Leaves of borage still form an ingredient in the beverages known as Copas and Cider-cup at Cambridge. See this usage, and the identity of the Buglossos discussed at some length by Beckmann, Hist. Inv. Vol. ii. p. 340, Bohn’s Ed.] mirth and hilarity, whence it has obtained the additional name of “euphrosynum.” [“Promoting cheerfulness.”]

### Chap. 41.—Cynoglossos: Three Remedies.

To this plant we may also annex an account of the cynoglossos, [“Dog’s tongue.” The Cynoglossum officinale of Linnæus, Hound’s tongue, or Venus’ navel-wort; or else the C. pictum of Aiton.] the leaf of which resembles a dog’s tongue, and which produces so pleasing an effect [Fée is at a loss to know how it can have been employed in topiary work or ornamental gardening.] in ornamental gardening. The root, it is said, of the kind which bears three [This statement is made by Dioscorides with reference to Arnoglossos, Lamb’s tongue, or Plantago. See c. 39, above.] stems surmounted with seed, is very useful, taken in water, for tertian, and of that with four stems, for quartan, fevers.

There is another plant [Identified with the Myosotis lappula of Linnæus, Prickly-seeded scorpion-grass.] very similar to it, which bears diminutive burrs resembling those of the lappa: [See B. xxi. c. 64.] the root of it, taken in water, is curative of wounds inflicted by frogs [“Ranis.” Under this name he probably includes toads.] or serpents.

### Chap. 42.—The Buphthalmos or Cachla: One Remedy.

There is the buphthalmos [Sprengel and Desfontaines identify it with the Anthemis valentina of Linnæus, the Purple-stalked camomile; but Fée agrees with Sibthorp in considering it to be the Chrysanthemum segetum of Linnæus, the Corn marigold, the former not being, apparently, a native of Greece. Littré gives the Chrysanthemum coronarium of Linnæus, the Garland chrysanthemum.] also, so called from its resemblance to an ox’s eye, and with a leaf like that of fennel. It grows in the vicinity of towns, and is a branchy plant, with numerous stems, which are boiled and eaten. Some persons give it the name of “cachla.” In combination with wax, it disperses scirrhi. [“Steatomata.” Tumours of a fatty nature.]

### Chap. 43.—Plants Which Have Been Discovered by Certain Nations. The Scythice: One Remedy.

Entire nations, too, have been the discoverers of certain plants. The Scythæ were the first to discover the plant known as “scythice,” [Generally agreed to be identical with the Glycyrrhiza of B. xxii. c. 2, our Liquorice. Fée says that the G. asperrima grows in great abundance on the banks of the river Volga.] which grows in the vicinity of the Palus [See B. xxvii. c. 1.] Mæotis. Among its other properties, this plant is remarkably sweet, and extremely useful for the affection known as “asthma.” It is also possessed of another great recommendation—so long as a person keeps it in his month, he will never [Liquorice certainly palls the appetite, but it is very apt to create thirst.] experience hunger or thirst.

### Chap. 44.—The Hippace: Three Remedies.

The hippace, [In copying from the Greek, Pliny has mistaken “hippace,” a cheese made from mare’s milk, for a plant! It is very likely, however, that it would tend, like any other cheese, to appease hunger, though, probably, not thirst.] another plant that grows in Scythia, is possessed of similar properties: it owes [He has probably invented this reason himself, as it is hardly probable that the Scythians would feed their horses with cheese, even though made from mare’s milk.] its name to the circumstance that it produces the like effect upon horses. By the aid of these two plants, the Scythæ, they say, are enabled to endure hunger and thirst, so long as twelve days even.

### Chap. 45.—The Ischæmon: Two Remedies.

The Thracians were the first to discover the ischæmon, [Sprengel identifies it with the Andropogon ischæmon of Linnæus, the Woolly andropogon. Fée expresses his doubts as to its identification. It derives its name “ischæmon,” from its property of stanching blood.] which, it is said, has the property of stanching the flow of blood, not only when a vein has been opened, but when it has been cut asunder even. This is a creeping plant; it is like millet in appearance, and the leaves of it are rough and lanuginous. It is used as a plug [To arrest epistaxis or bleeding at the nose.] for the nostrils. The kind that grows in Italy, attached to the body as an amulet, has the property of arresting hæmorrhage.

### Chap. 46.—The Cestros, Psychotrophon, Vettonica, or Serratula: Forty-eight Remedies.

The Vettones, a people of Spain, were the original discoverers of the plant known as the “vettonica” [The Betonica alopecuros of Linnæus, the Fox-tail betony.] in Gaul, the “serratula” [The “little saw.”] in Italy, and the “cestros” or “psychotrophon” [“Nurtured by breezes.” M. Fraäs thinks that the Cestros of the Greeks is a different plant from the Vettonica of the Romans, and identifies it with the Sideritis Syriaca.] in Greece. This is a plant more highly esteemed than any other: it puts forth an angular stem two cubits in height, and throws out leaves from the root, with serrated edges, and closely resembling those of lapathum. [See B. xx. c. 85.] The seed of it is purple: the leaves are dried and powdered, and used for numerous purposes. There is a wine also prepared from it, and a vinegar, remarkably beneficial to the stomach and the eyesight. Indeed, this plant enjoys so extraordinary a reputation, that it is a common belief even that the house which contains it is insured against misfortunes of every kind.

### Chap. 47.—The Cantabrica: Two Remedies.

In Spain, too, is found the cantabrica, [Pliny is the only author that mentions the Cantabrica, and his account, Fée thinks, is too meagre to enable us satisfactorily to identify it with the Convolvulus cantabrica of Linnæus.] which was first discovered by the nation of the Cantabri in the time of the late Emperor Augustus. It grows everywhere in those parts, having a stem like that of the bulrush, a foot in height, and bearing small oblong flowers, like a calathus [A conical work-basket or cup. See B. xxi. c. 11.] in shape, and enclosing an extremely diminutive seed.

Nor indeed, in other respects, have the people of Spain been wanting in their researches into the nature of plants; for at the present day even it is the custom in that country, at their more jovial entertainments, to use a drink called the hundred-plant drink, combined with a proportion of honied wine; it being their belief, that the wine is rendered more wholesome and agreeable by the admixture of these plants. It still remains unknown to us, what these different plants are, or in what number exactly they are used: as to this last question, however, we may form some conclusion from the name that is given to the beverage.

### Chap. 48.—Consiligo: One Remedy.

Our own age, too, can remember the fact of a plant being discovered in the country of the Marsi. It is found growing also in the neighbourhood of the village of Nervesia, in the territory of the Æquicoli, and is known by the name of “consiligo.” [Sprengel and other commentators identify it with the Pulmonaria officinalis of Linnæus, Lungwort or Pulmonary. Others, again, consider it to be the Veratrum album of Linnæus, or White hellebore. Fée considers that its synonym has not hitherto been discovered. Holland calls it Bear-foot.] It is very useful, as we shall have occasion to mention [B. xxvi. c. 21.] in the appropriate place, in cases of phthisis where recovery is considered more than doubtful.

### Chap. 49.—The Iberis: Seven Remedies.

It is but very lately, too, that Servilius Democrates, one of our most eminent physicians, first called attention to a plant to which he gave the name of iberis, [Fée identifies it with the Lepidium graminifolium of Linnæus, Grass-leaved pepperwort; Desfontaines with the L. Iberis of Linnæus, Bushy pepperwort. Littré gives as its synonym the Iberis amara of Linnæus, the White candy-tuft.] a fanciful appellation [“Fictum nomen.” Salmasius thinks that by these words, Pliny means that Democrates invented the name of a friend of his as being the discoverer of this plant, which in reality was discovered by himself. It would seem to mean, however, that the name “iberis” was only a fanciful title, derived from the country where it was found, and given to it for want of acquaintance with its real name.] only, bestowed by him upon this discovery of his in the verses by him devoted [Still preserved in Galen, B. x. c. 2.] to it. This plant is found mostly growing in the vicinity of ancient monuments, old walls, and overgrown footpaths: it is an evergreen, and its leaves are like those of nasturtium, with a stem a cubit in height, and a seed so diminutive as to be hardly perceptible; the root, too, has just the smell of nasturtium. Its properties are more strongly developed in summer, and it is only used fresh-gathered: there is considerable difficulty in pounding it.

Mixed with a small proportion of axle-grease, it is extremely useful for sciatica and all diseases of the joints; the application being kept on some four hours at the utmost, when used by the male sex, and about half that time in the case of females. Immediately after its removal, the patient must take a warm bath, and then anoint the body all over with oil and wine—the same operation being repeated every twenty days, so long as there are any symptoms of pain remaining. A similar method is adopted for the cure of all internal defluxions; it is never applied, however, so long as the inflammation is at its height, but only when it has somewhat abated.

### Chap. 50.—Plants Which Have Been Discovered by Certain Animals. Chelidonia: Six Remedies.

The brute animals also have been the discoverers of certain plants: among them, we will name chelidonia first of all. It is by the aid of this plant that the swallow restores the sight of the young birds in the nest, and even, as some persons will have it, when the eyes have been plucked out. There are two varieties of this plant; the larger [The Chelidonium majus of Linnæus, the Greater celandine or swallow-wort.] kind has a branchy stem, and a leaf somewhat similar to that of the wild parsnip, [“Pastinaca erratica.” See c. 64 of this Book.] but larger. The plant itself is some two cubits in height, and of a whitish colour, that of the flower being yellow. The smaller [Identified with the Ranunculus ficaria of Linnæus, the Pilewort, or Lesser celandine.] kind has leaves like those of ivy, only rounder and not so white. The juice of it is pungent, and resembles saffron in colour, and the seed is similar to that of the poppy.

These plants blossom, [The same is the case, Fée remarks, with numbers of other plants.] both of them, at the arrival of the swallow, and wither at the time of its departure. The juice is extracted while they are in flower, and is boiled gently in a copper vessel on hot ashes, with Attic honey, being esteemed a sovereign remedy for films upon the eyes. This juice is employed also, unmixed with any other substance, for the eyesalves, [“Collyriis.”] which from it take their name of “chelidonia.”

### Chap. 51.—The Dog-plant: One Remedy.

Dogs, too, are in the habit of seeking a certain plant, [The Dactylos of B. xxiv. c. 119, is supposed to be the plant alluded to. The word “canariam” is found here in former editions, but Sillig omits it. Indeed Pliny seems to say that it is quite unknown to him.] as a stimulant to the appetite; but although they eat it in our presence, it has never yet been discovered what it is, it being quite impossible to recognize it when seen half-chewed. There has also been remarked another bit of spitefulness in this animal, though in a much greater degree, in reference to another plant. When stung by a serpent, it cures itself, they say, by eating a certain herb, taking care, however, never to gather it in presence of man.

### Chap. 52.—The Elaphoboscon.

The hind, with a much greater degree of frankness, has discovered to us the elaphoboscon, a plant of which we have already [In B. xxii. c. 37.] spoken, and which is also called “helxine,” [From the Greek ἕλκω, “to draw.”] from the assistance it affords those animals in yeaning.

### Chap. 53.—Dictamnon: Eight Remedies. Pseudodictamnon or Chondris. In What Places the Most Powerful Plants Are Found. How That Milk Is Drunk in Arcadia for the Beneficial Effects of the Plants Upon Which the Cattle Feed.

It is the hind, too, that, as already [In B. viii. c. 41.] stated, first made us acquainted with dictamnon, [The Origanum dictamnus of Linnæus, Dittany of Candia.] or dittany; for when wounded, it eats some of this plant, and the weapon immediately falls from the body. This plant grows nowhere [This is an error: it grows, and doubtless did in Pliny’s time, in numerous other places; but that of Mount Ida in Crete was held in the highest esteem.] but in Crete. The branches of it are remarkably thin; it resembles pennyroyal in appearance, and is hot and acrid to the taste. The leaves are the only part employed, it being destitute of [It has all three, in fact; as Fée says, it is evident that Pliny never saw it. Its medicinal properties are no longer held in any esteem.] blossom, seed, and stem: the root is thin, and never used. In Crete even, it is found growing only in a very limited locality, and is sought by goats with singular avidity.

In place of it, the pseudodictamnum [“False-dittany.” It is generally identified with the Marrubium pseudodictamnus of Linnæus, the Shrubby white horehound; though perhaps on insufficient grounds.] is employed, a plant that is found growing in many countries. In leaf it is similar to the other, but the branches are more diminutive: by some persons it is known as “chondris.” Its properties not being so strongly developed, the difference is immediately recognized: for an infusion of the very smallest piece of the real dittany, is sufficient to burn the mouth. The persons who gather it are in the habit of enclosing it in a stem of fennel-giant or in a reed, which they close at the ends that the virtues of it may not escape. Some persons say, that both plants grow indiscriminately in numerous localities, the inferior sort being the produce of rich soils, and the genuine dittany being found nowhere but in rugged, uncultivated spots.

There is, again, a third [Fée is inclined, with Sprengel, to identify it with the Origanum Creticum of Linnæus. Other commentators have suggested the Origanum Tournefortii, the Thymus mastichina of Linnæus, and the Marrubium acetabulosum of Linnæus.] plant called “dictamnum,” which, however, has neither the appearance nor the properties of the other plant so called; the leaves of it are like those of sisymbrium, [See B. xx. c. 91.] but the branches are larger.

There has long been this impression with reference to Crete, that whatever plant grows there is infinitely superior in its properties to a similar plant the produce of any other country; the second rank being given to the produce of Mount Parnassus. In addition to this, it is generally asserted that simples of excellent quality are found upon Mount Pelion in Thessaly, Mount Teleuthrius in Eubœa, and throughout the whole of Arcadia and Laconia. Indeed, the Arcadians, they say, are in the habit of using, not the simples themselves, but milk, in the spring season more particularly; a period at which the field plants are swollen with juice, and the milk is medicated by their agency. It is cows’ milk in especial that they use for this purpose, those animals being in the habit of feeding upon nearly every kind of plant. The potent properties of plants are manifested by their action upon four-footed animals in two very remarkable instances: in the vicinity of Abdera and the tract known as the Boundary [“Limes Diomedis.”] of Diomedes, the horses, after pasturing, become inflamed with frantic fury; the same is the case, too, with the male asses, in the neighbourhood of Potniæ.

### Chap. 54.—The Aristolochia, Clematitis, Cretica, Plistolochia, Lochia Polyrrhizos, or Apple of the Earth: Twenty-two Remedies.

In the number of the most celebrated plants is the aristolochia, which would appear to have derived its name from females in a state of pregnancy, as being ἀρίστη λοχούσαις. [“Most excellent for pregnancy.”] Among us, however, it is known as the “malum terræ,” or apple of the earth, [See B. xxvi. c. 56.] four different varieties of it being distinguished. One of these has a root covered with tubercles of a rounded [Identified by Fée with the Aristolochia rotunda of Linnæus, Rounded birthwort, a native of the south of France and the southern parts of Europe. Littré gives the Aristolochia pallida of Willdenow.] shape, and leaves of a mixed appearance, between those of the mallow and the ivy, only softer and more swarthy. The second [Most probably the Aristolochia longa of Linnæus, found in France, Spain, Portugal, and Italy. Littré gives as its synonym the Aristolochia parvifolia of Sibthorp.] kind is the male plant, with an elongated root some four fingers in length, and the thickness of a walking-stick. A third [The Aristolochia clematis of Linnæus, almost identical with the Aristolochia Cretica and Bætica.] variety is extremely thin and long, similar to a young vine in appearance: it has the most strongly-marked properties of them all, and is known by the additional names of “clematitis,” and “cretica.” All these plants are the colour of boxwood, have a slender stem, and bear a purple flower and small berries like those of the caper: the root is the only part that is possessed of any virtues.

There is also a fourth [The Aristolochia plistolochia of Linnæus, the Spanish branching stemmed birthwort. Fée thinks that these identifications, though probable enough, are not altogether satisfactory, and that the Greeks may have made these distinctions between varieties of the plant comparatively unknown to the rest of Europe. They are no longer held in any esteem for their medicinal properties.] kind, the name given to which is “plistolochia;” it is more slender than the one last mentioned, has a root thickly covered with filaments, and is about as thick as a good-sized bulrush: another name given to it is “polyrrhizos.” The smell of all these plants is medicinal, but that of the one with an oblong root and a very slender stem, is the most agreeable: this last, in fact, which has a fleshy outer coat, is well adapted as an ingredient for nardine unguents even. They grow in rich champaign soils, and the best time for gathering them is harvest; after the earth is scraped from off them, they are put by for keeping.

The aristolochia that is the most esteemed, however, is that which comes from Pontus; but whatever the soil may happen to be, the more weighty it is, the better adapted it is for medicinal purposes. The aristolochia with a round root is recommended for the stings of serpents, and that with an oblong root \* \* \* \* But in this is centred its principal reputation; applied to the uterus with raw beef, as a pessary, immediately after conception, it will ensure the birth of male [See B. xxvi. c. 91.] issue, they say. The fishermen on the coasts of Campania give the round root the name of “poison of the earth;” and I myself have seen them pound it with lime, and throw it into the sea; immediately on which the fish flew towards it with surprising avidity, and being struck dead in an instant, floated upon the surface.

The kind that is known as “polyrrhizos,” [“With many roots.”] is remarkably good, they say, for convulsions, contusions, and falls with violence, an infusion of the root being taken in water: the seed, too, is useful for pleurisy and affections of the sinews. It is considered, too, to be possessed of warming and strengthening properties, similar to those of satyrion, [See B. xxvi. c. 62.] in fact.

### Chap. 55.—The Employment of These Plants for Injuries Inflicted by Serpents.

But it will be as well now to mention the various uses made of these plants, and the effects produced by them, beginning with that most dangerous of all evils that can befall us, stings inflicted by serpents. In such cases the plant britannica [See c. 6 of this Book.] effects a cure, and the same is the case with the root of all the varieties of panaces, [See cc. 11, 12, 13, 14, of this Book.] administered in wine. The flower, too, and seed of panaces chironion are taken in drink, or applied externally with wine and oil: cunila bubula, [See B. xx. c. 61.] too, is looked upon as particularly useful for this purpose, and the root of polemonia or philetæris is taken in doses of four drachmæ in unmixed wine. Teucria, [See B. xxiv. c. 80.] sideritis, [See c. 15 of this Book.] and scordotis, [See c. 27 of this Book.] are used in wine, plants particularly good, all of them, for injuries inflicted by snakes; the juice or leaves, or else a decoction of them, being taken in drink or applied to the wound. For a similar purpose also, the root of the greater centaury is taken, in doses of one drachma to three cyathi of white wine. Gentian, too, is particularly good for the stings of snakes, taken either fresh or dried, in doses of two drachmæ, mixed with rue and pepper in six cyathi of wine. The odour, too, of lysimachia [See c. 35 of this Book.] puts serpents to flight.

Chelidonia [See c. 50 of this Book.] is also given in wine to persons who have been stung; and betony in particular is used as an external application to the wound, a plant the virtues of which are so extraordinary, it is said, that if a circle of it is traced around a serpent, it will lash itself to death [See B. xvi. c. 24.] with its tail. The seed of this plant is also administered in such cases, in doses of one denarius to three cyathi of wine; or else it is dried and powdered, and applied to the wound, in the proportion of three denarii of powder to one sextarius of water.

Cantabrica, dittany, and aristolochia, are also similarly used, one drachma of the root of this last plant being taken every now and then in a semisextarius of wine. It is very useful too, rubbed in with vinegar, and the same is the case, also, with plistolochia: [See c. 54 of this Book. As Fée remarks, these asserted remedies for the stings of serpents are not deserving of discussion.] indeed it will be quite sufficient to suspend this last over the hearth, to make all serpents leave the house.

### Chap. 56. (9.)—The Argemonia: Four Remedies.

The argemonia, [The Papaver argemone of Linnæus, the Rough poppy. It is a native of France, and many other parts of Europe.] too, is remedial in such cases; the root of it being taken, in doses of one denarius, in three cyathi of wine. It will be as well, however, to enter into some further details in reference to this plant and others, which I shall have occasion next to mention; it being my intention first to describe, under each head, those plants which are the most efficacious for the treatment of the affection under consideration.

The argemonia has leaves like those of the anemone, but divided [This, Fée remarks, is not stated by Dioscorides, whose description is more correct.] like those of parsley: the head grows upon a slender stem resembling that of the wild poppy, and the root is also very similar to that of the same plant. The juice is of a saffron colour, acrid and pungent: the plant is commonly found in the fields of this country. Among us there are three [It is supposed by commentators that he is in error here, and that this description applies to the Lappa canaria, mentioned in B. xxiv. c. 116.] varieties of it distinguished, the one being the most highly approved of, the root of which smells [The root of the Papaver argemone has no such smell.] like frankincense. [See B. xxi. c. 94, B. xxiv. c. 116, and B. xxvi. c. 59.]

### Chap. 57.—Agaric: Thirty-three Remedies.

Agaric [The Boletus agaricum of Aiton, or White agaric. It is a strong purgative, but is rarely used for that purpose.] is found growing in the form of a fungus of a white colour, upon the trees in the vicinity of the Bosporus. It is administered in doses of four oboli, beaten up in two cyathi of oxymel. The kind that grows in Galatia is generally looked upon as not so efficacious. The male [This distinction into male and female is no longer recognized, though it continued to be so till within the last century.] agaric is firmer than the other, and more bitter; it is productive too of head-ache. The female plant is of a looser texture; it has a sweet taste at first, which speedily changes into a bitter flavour.

### Chap. 58.—The Echios; Three Varieties of It: Two Remedies.

Of the echios there are two kinds; one [Desfontaines identifies it with the Saponaria ocimoïdes. Fée thinks it may have possibly been some kind of sage, or else a variety of the Lavendula stœchas of Linnæus, French lavender. Littré gives the Silene Gallica of Linnæus, the Gallic catchfly.] of which resembles pennyroyal in appearance, and has a concave leaf. It is administered, in doses of two drachmæ, in four cyathi of wine. The other [Identified by Fée with the Pseudanchusa, Echis, or Doris of B. xxii. c. 24, the Anchusa Italica of Linnæus. Littré gives the Echium rubrum of Linnæus.] kind is distinguished by a prickly down, and bears small heads resembling those of vipers: it is usually taken in wine and vinegar. Some persons give the name of “echios personata” [The Arctium lappa of Linnæus, probably, our Great clot-burr. See B. xxi. c. 51.] to a kind of echios with larger leaves than the others, and burrs of considerable size, resembling that of the lappa. [See B. xxi. c. 64.] The root of this plant is boiled and administered in vinegar. Henbane, pounded with the leaves on, is taken in wine, for the sting of the asp in particular.
