---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 39-62."
chapter_order: 188
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 39.—The Tithymalos Characias.

The tithymalos is called by our people the “milk plant,” [“Herba lactaria.”] and by some persons the “goat lettuce.” [Because goats are fond of it. See B. xx. c. 24.] They say, that if characters are traced upon the body with the milky juice of this plant, and powdered with ashes, when dry, the letters will be perfectly visible; an expedient which has been adopted before now by intriguers, for the purpose of communicating with their mistresses, in preference to a correspondence by letter. There are numerous varieties of this plant. [Known to us by the general name of Euphorbia of Spurge.] The first kind has the additional name of “characias,” [The Euphorbia characias of Linnæus, Red spurge. An oil is still extracted from the seed of several species of Euphorbia, as a purgative; but they are in general highly dangerous, taken internally.] and is generally looked upon as the male plant. Its branches are about a finger in thickness, red and full of juice, five or six in number, and a cubit in length. The leaves near the root are almost exactly those of the olive, and the extremity of the stem is surmounted with a tuft like that of the bulrush: it is found growing in rugged localities near the sea-shore. The seed is gathered in autumn, together with the tufts, and after being dried in the sun, is beaten out and put by for keeping. As to the juice, the moment the down begins to appear upon, the fruit, the branches are broken off and the juice of them is received upon either meal of fitches or else figs, and left to dry therewith. Five drops are as much as each fig ought to receive; and the story is, that if a dropsical patient eats one of these figs he will have as many motions as the fig has received drops. While the juice is being collected, due care must be taken not to let it touch the eyes. From the leaves, pounded, a juice is also extracted, but not of so useful a nature as the other kind: a decoction, too, is made from the branches.

The seed also is used, being boiled with honey and made up, into purgative [“Catapotia.”] pills. These seeds are sometimes inserted in hollow teeth with wax: the teeth are rinsed too, with a decoction of the root in wine or oil. The juice is used externally for lichens, and is taken internally both as an emetic and to promote alvine evacuation: in other respects, it is prejudicial to the stomach. Taken in drink, with the addition of salt, it carries off pituitous humours; and in combination with saltpetre, [“Aphronitrum.” See B. xxx. c. 46] removes bile. In cases where it is desirable that it should purge by stool, it is taken with oxycrate, but where it is wanted to act as an emetic, with raisin wine or hydromel; three oboli being a middling dose. The best method, however, of using it, is to eat the prepared figs above-mentioned, just after taking food. In taste, it is slightly burning to the throat; indeed it is of so heating a nature, that, applied externally by itself, it raises blisters on the flesh, like those caused by the action of fire. Hence it is that it is sometimes employed as a cautery.

### Chap. 40.—The Tithymalos Myrtites, or Caryites; Twenty-one Remedies.

A second kind of tithymalos is called “myrtites” [The Euphorbia myrsinites of Linnæus.] by some persons, and “caryites” by others. It has leaves like those of myrtle, pointed and prickly, but with a softer surface, and grows, like the one already mentioned, in rugged soils. The tufted heads of it are gathered just, as barley is beginning to swell in the ear, and, after being left for nine days in the shade, are thoroughly dried in the sun. The fruit does not ripen all at once, some, indeed, not till the ensuing year. The name given to this fruit is the “nut,” whence the Greek appellation “caryites.” [From the Greek κάρυον, a “nut.”] It is gathered at harvest, and is washed and dried, being given with twice the quantity of black poppy, in doses of one acetabulum in all.

As an emetic, this kind is not so efficacious as the preceding one, and, indeed, the same may be said of all the others. Some physicians recommend the leaf to be taken in the manner already mentioned, but say that the nut should either be taken in honied wine or raisin wine, or else with sesame. It carries off pituitous humours and bile by stool, and is curative of ulcerations of the mouth. For corrosive sores of the mouth, the leaf is eaten with honey.

### Chap. 41.—The Tithymalos Paralios, or Tithymalis: Four Remedies.

A third kind of tithymalos is known by the additional name of “paralios,” [“Sea-shore” tithymalus. See B. xx. c. 80.] or else as “tithymalis.” [The Euphorbia paralias of Linnæus, Sea spurge.] The leaf is round, the stem a palm in height, the branches red, and the seed white. This seed is gathered just as the grape is beginning to form, and is dried and pounded; being taken as a purgative, in doses of one acetabulum.

### Chap. 42.—The Tithymalos Helioscopios: Eighteen Remedies.

A fourth kind of tithymalos [The Euphorbia helioscopia of Linnæus, Sun spurge or Wart-wort.] is known by the additional name of “helioscopios.” [“Sun-watching.”] It has leaves like those of purslain, [See B. xx. c. 81.] and some four or five small branches standing out from the root, of a red colour, half a foot in height, and full of juice. This plant grows in the vicinity of towns: the seed is white, and pigeons [Fée says that this is more than doubtful.] are remarkably fond of it. It receives its additional name of “helioscopios” from the fact that the heads of it turn [An assertion, Fée says, not confirmed by modern observation.] with the sun. Taken in doses of half an acetabulum, in oxymel, it carries off bile by stool: in other respects it has the same properties as the characias, above-mentioned.

### Chap. 43.—The Tithymalos Cyparissias: Eighteen Remedies.

In the fifth place we have the tithymalos known as “cyparissias,” [The Euphorbia cyparissias of Linnæus, the Cypress spurge, or else the Euphorbia Aleppica of Linnæus.] from the resemblance of its leaves to those of the cypress. It has a double or triple stem, and grows in champaign localities. Its properties are exactly similar to those of the helioscopios and characias.

### Chap. 44.—The Tithymalos Platyphyllos, Corymbites, or Amygdalites: Three Remedies.

The sixth kind is called “platyphyllos” [“Broad-leaved,” “clustered,” and “almond-like.” It is the Euphorbia platyphyllos of Linnæus, the Broad-leaved spurge.] by some, and “corymbites” or “amygdalites” by others, from its resemblance to the almond-tree. The leaves of this kind are the largest of all: it has a fatal effect upon fish. An infusion of the root or leaves, or the juice, taken in doses of four drachmæ, in honied wine, or hydromel, acts as a purgative. It is particularly useful also for carrying off the aqueous humours.

### Chap. 45.—The Tithymalos Dendroïdes, Cobios, or Leptophyllos: Eighteen Remedies.

The seventh kind has the additional name of “dendroïdes,” [“Tree-like”] and is known by some persons as “cobios,” and by others as “leptophyllos.” [“Small-leaved.” The Euphorbia dendroides of Linnæus, the Shrubby spurge.] It grows among rocks, and is by far the most shrubby of all the varieties of the tithymalos. The stems of it are small and red, and the seed is remarkably abundant. Its properties are the same as those of the characias. [See c. 39 above.]

### Chap. 46.—The Apios Ischas, or Raphanos Agria: Two Remedies.

The apios ischas or raphanos agria, [“Wild radish.” Identified with the Euphorbia apios of Linnæus, a plant with dangerous properties.] throws out two or three rush-like branches of a red colour, creeping upon the ground, and bearing leaves like those of rue. The root resembles that of an onion, only that it is larger, for which reason some have called it the “wild radish.” The interior of this root is composed of a mammose substance, containing a white juice: the outer coat is black. It grows in rugged, mountainous spots, and sometimes in pasture lands. It is taken up in spring, and pounded and put into an earthen vessel, that portion of it being removed which floats upon the surface. The part which remains acts purgatively, taken in doses of an obolus and a half in hydromel, both as an emetic and by stool. This juice is administered also, in doses of one acetabulum, for dropsy.

The root of this plant is dried and powdered, and taken in drink: the upper part of it, they say, carries off bile by acting as an emetic, the lower part, by promoting alvine evacuation.

### Chap. 47.—Remedies for Griping Pains in the Bowels.

Every kind of panaces [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] is curative of gripings in the bowels; as also betony, except in those cases where they arise from indigestion. Juice of peucedanum [See B. xxv c. 70.] is good for flatulency, acting powerfully as a carminative: the same is the case, also, with root of acoron [See B. xxv. c. 100.] and with daucus, [See B. xxv. c. 64.] eaten like lettuce as a salad. Ladanum [See B. xii. c. 37, and c. 30 of this Book.] of Cyprus, taken in drink, is curative of intestinal affections; and a similar effect is produced by powdered gentian, taken in warm water, in quantities about as large as a bean. For the same purpose, plantago [See B. xxv. c. 39.] is taken in the morning, in doses of two spoonfuls, with one spoonful of poppy in four cyathi of wine, due care being taken that it is not old wine. It is given, too, at the last moment before going to sleep, and with the addition of nitre or polenta, [See B. xviii. c. 14.] if a considerable time has elapsed since the last meal. For colic, an injection of the juice is used, one hemina at a time, even in cases where fever has supervened.

### Chap. 48.—Remedies for Diseases of the Spleen.

Agaric, taken in doses of three oboli in one cyathus of old wine, is curative of diseases of the spleen. The same, too, with the root of every kind of panaces, [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] taken in honied wine: teucria, [See B. xxiv. c. 80.] also, is particularly useful for the same purpose, taken in a dry state, or boiled down in the proportion of one handful to three heminæ of vinegar. Teucria, too, is applied with vinegar to wounds of the spleen, or, if the patient cannot bear the application of vinegar, with figs or water. Polemonia [See B. xxv. c. 28.] is taken in wine, and betony, in doses of one drachma, in three cyathi of oxymel: aristolochia, too, is used in the same manner as for injuries inflicted by serpents. [See B. xxv. c. 55.] Argemonia, [See B. xxv. c. 56.] it is said, taken with the food for seven consecutive days, diminishes the volume of the spleen; and a similar effect is attributed to agaric, taken in doses of two oboli, in oxymel. Root, too, of nymphæa heraclia, [See B. xxv. c. 37.] taken in wine, or by itself, diminishes the spleen.

Cissanthemos, [See B. xxv. c. 68.] taken twice a day, in doses of one drachma in two cyathi of white wine, for forty consecutive days, gradually carries off the spleen, it is said, by urine. Hyssop, boiled with figs, is very useful for the same purpose: root of lonchitis, [See B. xxv. c. 88. Fée says that it is the Aspidium lonchitis, of Linnæus, that is meant.] also, boiled before it has shed its seed. A decoction of root of peucedanum [See B. xxv. c. 70.] is good for the spleen and kidneys. Acoron, [See B. xxv. c. 100.] taken in drink, diminishes the spleen; and the roots of it are very beneficial for the viscera and iliac regions. For similar purposes, seed of clymenus [See B. xxv. c. 33.] is taken, for thirty consecutive days, in doses of one denarius, in white wine. Powdered betony is also used, taken in a potion with honey and squill vinegar; root too of lonchitis is taken in water. Teucrium [See B. xxv. c. 20.] is used externally for diseases of the spleen; scordium, [Or Scordotis. See B. xxv. c. 27.] also, in combination with wax; and agaric, mixed with powdered, fenugreek.

### Chap. 49.—Remedies for Calculi and Diseases of the Bladder.

For diseases of the bladder and calculi (affections which, as already observed, [See B. xxv. c. 7.] produce the most excruciating torments), polemonia [See B. xxv. c. 28.] is highly efficacious, taken in wine; agaric also, and leaves or root of plantago, taken in raisin wine. Betony, too, is very good, as already observed, when speaking [See c. 19 of this Book.] of diseases of the liver. This last plant is used also for hernia, applied topically or taken in drink: it is remarkably efficacious too for strangury. For calculi some persons recommend betony, vervain, and milfoil, in equal proportions in water, as a sovereign remedy. It is universally agreed that dittany is curative of strangury, and that the same is the case with cinquefoil, boiled down to one third in wine: this last plant is very useful, too, taken internally and applied topically, for rupture of the groin.

The upper part of the root of xiphion [See B. xxv. cc. 88,89.] has a diuretic effect upon infants; it is administered also in water for rupture of the groin, and is applied topically for diseases of the bladder. Juice of peucedanum [See B. xxv. c. 70.] is employed for hernia in infants, and psyllion [See B. xxv. c. 90.] is used as an application in cases of umbilical hernia. The two kinds of anagallis [See B. xxv. c. 92.] are diuretic, and a similar effect is produced by a decoction of root of acoron, [See B. xxv. c. 100.] or the plant itself bruised and taken in drink; this last is good too for all affections of the bladder. Both the stem and root of cotyledon [It is quite useless for such a purpose; and the same is the case, Fée says, with all the asserted remedies mentioned in this Chapter. See B. xxv. c. 101] are used for the cure of calculi; and for all inflammations of the genitals, myrrh is mixed in equal proportions with the stem and seed. The more tender leaves of ebulum, [See B. xxv. c. 71.] beaten up and taken with wine, expel calculi of the bladder, and an application of them is curative of diseases of the testes. Erigeron, [See B. xxv. c. 106.] with powdered frankincense and sweet wine, is curative of inflammation of the testes; and root of symphytum, [See B. xxvii. c. 24.] applied topically, reduces rupture of the groin. The white hypocisthis [See c. 31. of this Book.] is curative of corroding ulcers of the genitals. Artemisia [See B. xxv. c. 36.] is prescribed also in sweet wine for the cure of calculi and of strangury; and root of nymphæa heraclia, [See B. xxv. c. 37.] taken in wine, allays pains in the bladder.

### Chap. 50.—Crethmos: Eleven Remedies. Cachry.

A similar property belongs also to crethmos, [See B. xxv. c. 96.] a plant highly praised by Hippocrates. [De Nat. Mul. c. 20, and De Morb. Mul. I. 10.] This is one of the wild plants that are commonly eaten—at all events, we find Callimachus mentioning it as one of the viands set on table by the peasant Hecale. [See B. xxii. c. 44.] It is a species of garden batis, [See B. xxi. c. 50] with a stem a palm in height, and a hot seed, odoriferous like that of libanotis, [See B. xxv. c. 18.] and round. When dried, the seed bursts asunder, and discloses in the interior a white kernel, known as “cachry” to some. The leaf is unctuous and of a whitish colour, like that of the olive, only thicker and of a saltish taste. The roots are three or four in number, and about a finger in thickness: the plant grows in rocky localities, upon the sea-shore. It is eaten raw or else boiled with cabbage, and has a pleasant, aromatic flavour; it is preserved also in brine.

This plant is particularly useful for strangury, the leaves, stem, or root being taken in wine. It improves the complexion of the skin also, but if taken in excess is very apt to produce flatulency. Used in the form of a decoction it relaxes the bowels, has a diuretic effect, and carries off the humours from the kidneys. The same is the case also with alcea: [See B. xxvii. c. 6.] dried and powdered and taken in wine, it removes strangury, and, with the addition of daucus, [See B. xxv. c. 64.] is still more efficacious: it is good too for the spleen, and is taken in drink as an antidote to the venom of serpents. Mixed with their barley it is remarkably beneficial for beasts of burden, when suffering from pituitous defluxions or strangury.

### Chap. 51.—The Anthyllion; Two Remedies. The Anthyllis: Two Remedies.

The anthyllion [See B. xxi. c. 103.] is a plant very like the lentil. Taken in wine, it is remedial for diseases of the bladder, and arrests hæmorrhage, Another variety of it is the anthyllis, a plant resembling the chamæpitys, [See B. xxi. c. 103.] with a purple flower, a powerful smell, and a root like that of endive.

### Chap. 52.—Cepæa: One Remedy.

The plant known as “cepæa” [The Sedum cepæa of Linnæus, the Sea purslain. Holland calls it “Beccabunga,” or “Brooklime.”] is even more efficacious. It resembles purslain in appearance, but has a darker root, that is never used: it grows upon the sands of the sea-shore, and has a bitter taste. Taken in wine with root of asparagus, it is remarkably useful for diseases of the bladder.

### Chap. 53.—Hypericon, Chamæpitys, or Corison: Nine Remedies.

Hypericon, [Perhaps so called from the impressions on the leaves, ὑπὲρ and εἰκών, or else from its resemblance to heath, ὑπὲρ and ἐρέικη. See, however Note 1266 below.] otherwise known as the “chamæpitys” [“Ground pine.”] or “corison,” [Sillig reads this “corissum.” Former editions have “corion.”] is possessed of similar properties. It is a plant [Identified by Fée with the Hypericum perforatum of Linnæus, the Perforated St. John’s wort. Littré gives the Hypericum crispum of Linnæus.] with a stem like that [“Oleraceo.” Another reading is “surculaceo,” “tough and ligneous;” and is, perhaps, preferable.] of a garden vegetable, thin, red, and a cubit in length. The leaf is similar to that of rue, and has an acrid smell: the seed is enclosed in a swarthy pod, and ripens at the same time as barley. This seed is of an astringent nature, arrests diarrhœa, and acts as a diuretic: it is taken also for diseases of the bladder, in wine.

### Chap. 54.—Caros or Hypericon: Ten Remedies.

There is another hypericon also, known as “caros” [“Coris” is the old and more common reading, Fée identifies it with the Hypericum coris of Linnæus, and Brotero with the H. saxatile of Tournefort. Desfontaines gives as its synonym the Coris Monspelliensis.] by some. The leaves of it resemble those of the tamarix, [See B. xxiv. c. 41.] beneath [It is not improbable, supposing the “tamarix” to be one of the Ericæ, that to this circumstance it may owe its name. Indeed Dioscorides has ἐρείκη, in the corresponding passage.] which it grows, but are more unctuous [“Pinguioribus.”] and not so red. It is an odoriferous plant, somewhat more than a palm [Dioscorides gives the stem larger dimensions.] in height, of a sweet flavour, and slightly pungent. The seed is of a warming nature, and is consequently productive of eructations; it is not, however, injurious to the stomach. This plant is particularly useful for strangury, provided the bladder be not ulcerated; taken in wine, it is curative of pleurisy also.

### Chap. 55.—The Callithrix: One Remedy. The Perpressa: One Remedy. The Chrysanthemum: One Remedy. The Anthemis: One Remedy.

Callithrix, [See B. xxii. c. 30, and B. xxv. c. 86.] beaten up with cummin seed, and administered in white wine, is useful also for diseases of the bladder. Leaves of vervain, boiled down to one third, or root of vervain, in warm honied wine, expel calculi of the bladder.

Perpressa, [This plant has not been identified. Anguillara says that it is the same as the “repressa,” a plant given to horses by the people at Rome, when suffering from dysuria. What this plant is, no one seems to know.] a plant which grows in the vicinity of Arretium and in Illyricum, is boiled down to one third in three heminæ of water, and the decoction taken in drink: the same too with trefoil, [See B. xxi. c. 30.] which is administered in wine; and the same with the chrysanthemum. [The same as the Helichrysos of B. xx. cc. 38 and 96. It is identified with the Chrysanthemum segetum of Linnæus, the Corn marygold.] The anthemis [Fée identifies it with the Eranthemis of B. xxii. c. 26, which he considers to be the Anthemis rosea of Linnæus, the Rose camomile.] also is an expellent of calculi. It is a plant with five small leaves running from the root, two long stems, and a flower like a rose. The roots of it are pounded and administered alone, in the same way as raw laver. [See c. 32 of this Book.]

### Chap. 56.—Silaus: One Remedy.

Silaus [Hardouin thinks that it is the Apium graveolens of Linnæus, Smallage; but at the present day it is generally identified with the Peucedanum silaus of Linnæus, the Meadow sulphur-wort, or saxifrage.] is a plant which grows in running streams with a gravelly bed. It bears some resemblance to parsley, and is a cubit in height. It is cooked in the same manner as the acid vegetables, [Sorrel, for instance.] and is of great utility for affections of the bladder. In cases where that organ is affected with eruptions, [“Scabiem.”] it is used in combination with root of panaces, [See B. xxv. c. 11.] a plant which is otherwise bad for the bladder. The erratic apple, [Generally supposed to be the same as the “Apple of the earth,” mentioned in B. xxv. c. 54.] too, is an expellent of calculi. For this purpose, a pound of the root is boiled down to one half in a congius of wine, and one hemina of the decoction is taken for three consecutive days, the remainder being taken in wine with sium. [See B. xx. c. 41.] Sea-nettle [It is doubtful whether he means an animal or plant; most probably the latter, but if so, it is quite unknown.] is employed too for the same purpose, daucus, [See B. xxv. c. 64.] and seed of plantago in wine.

### Chap. 57.—The Plant of Fulvius.

The plant of Fulvius [“Herba Fulviana.”] too—so called from the first discoverer of it, and well known [A plant now unknown.] to herbalists—bruised in wine, acts as a diuretic.

### Chap. 58.—Remedies for Diseases of the Testes and of the Fundament.

Scordion [See B. xxv. c. 27. In reality it is of an irritating nature.] reduces swellings of the testes. Henbane is curative of diseases of the generative organs. Strangury is cured by juice of peucedanum, [See B. xxv. c. 70.] taken with honey; as also by the seed of that plant. Agaric is also used for the same purpose, taken in doses of three oboli in one cyathus of old wine; root of trefoil, in doses of two drachmæ in wine; and root or seed of daucus, [See B. xxv. c. 64.] in doses of one drachma. For the cure of sciatica, the seed and leaves of erythrodanum [Or madder; see B. xix. c. 17. The seed and leaves are no longer employed in medicine; the root has been employed in modern times, Fée says, but with no success.] are used, pounded; panaces, [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] taken in drink; polemonia, [See B. xxv. c. 28.] employed as a friction; and leaves of aristolochia, [See B. xxv. c. 54.] in the form of a decoction. Agaric, taken in doses of three oboli in one cyathus of old wine, is curative of affections of the tendon known as “platys” [Or “broad” tendon. The Tendon Achillis.] and of pains in the shoulders. Cinquefoil is either taken in drink or applied topically for the cure of sciatica; a decoction of scammony is used also, with barley meal; and the seed of either kind of hypericon [See cc. 53 and 54 of this Book.] is taken in wine.

For diseases of the fundament and for excoriations plantago is remarkably efficacious; for condylomata, cinquefoil; and for procidence of the rectum, root of cyclaminos, [See B. xxv. c. 67.] applied in vinegar. The blue anagallis [See B. xxv. c. 92.] reduces procidence of the rectum, while, on the contrary, that with a red flower has a tendency to bear it down. Cotyledon [See B. xxv. c. 101.] is a marvellous cure for condylomatous affections and piles; and root of acoron, [See B. xxv. c. 100.] boiled in wine and beaten up, is a good application for swelling of the testes. According to what Cato [De Rust. c. 159. He says that is must be carried under the ring.] says, those who carry about them Pontic [See B. xxvii. c. 28.] wormwood, will never experience chafing between the thighs.

(9.) Some persons add pennyroyal to the number of these plants: gathered fasting, they say, and attached to the hinder part of the body, it will be an effectual preservative against all pains in the groin, and will allay them in cases where they already exist.

### Chap. 59.—Inguinalis or Argemo.

Inguinalis [The “Groin plant.” Probably the same as the Bubonion of B. xxvii. c. 19.] again, or, as some persons call it, “argemo,” a plant commonly found growing in bushes and thickets, needs only to be held in the hand to be productive of beneficial effects upon the groin.

### Chap. 60.—Remedies for Inflamed Tumours. Chrysippios: One Remedy.

Panaces, [See B. xxv. c. 11. et seq.] applied with honey, heals inflammatory tumours; an effect which is equally produced by plantago applied with salt, cinquefoil, root of persolata [See c. 12 of this Book.] used in the same way as for scrofula; damasonium [See B. xxv. c. 77.] also, and verbascum [See B. xxv. c. 73.] pounded with the root, and then sprinkled with wine, and wrapped in a leaf warmed upon ashes, and applied hot. Persons of experience in these matters have asserted that it is of primary importance that the application should be made by a maiden, as also that she must be naked at the time, and fasting. The patient must be fasting too, and the damsel must say, touching him with the back of her hand, [The following is the formula of this monstrous piece of absurdity: “Negat Apollo pestem posse crescere cui nuda virgo restinguat.”] “Apollo forbids that a disease shall increase which a naked virgin restrains.” So saying, she must withdraw her hand, and repeat to the above effect three times, both of them spitting upon the ground each time.

Root, too, of mandragora [See B. xxv. c. 94.] is used for this purpose, with water; a decoction of root of scammony with honey; sideritis [See B. xxv. c. 19.] beaten up with stale grease; horehound with stale axle-grease; or chrysippios, [An unknown plant.] a plant which owes its name to its discoverer—with pulpy figs.

### Chap. 61. (10.)—Aphrodisiacs and Antaphrodisiacs.

Nymphæa heraclia, used as already stated, [In B. xxv. c. 37. This alleged property of the Nymphæa is entirely fabulous.] acts most powerfully as an antaphrodisiac; the same too if taken once every forty days in drink. Taken in drink fasting, or eaten with the food, it effectually prevents the recurrence of libidinous dreams. The root too, used in the form of a liniment and applied to the generative organs, not only represses all prurient desires, but arrests the seminal secretions as well; for which reason, it is said to have a tendency to make flesh and to improve the voice. [See B. xx. c. 13.]

The upper part of the root of xiphion, [See B. xxv. cc. 88 and 89.] taken in wine, acts as an aphrodisiac. The same is the case too with the wild crethmos, [See B. xxv. c. 96.] or agrios as it is called, and with horminum, [See B, xviii. cc. 10 and 22.] beaten up with polenta. [See B. xviii. c. 14.]

### Chap. 62.—The Orchis or Serapias: Five Medicinal Properties. Satyrion.

But there are few plants of so marvellous a nature as the orchis [Identified by Littré with the Orchis undulatifolia, and by Fée with the Orchis morio of Linnæus, the Female orchis, or Female fool-stones. Its aphrodisiac properties seem not to have been proved by modern experience, but it is nourishing in the highest degree. Linnæus, however, seems to be of opinion that it may have the effect of an aphrodisiac upon cattle. It is the name, no doubt, signifying “testicle,” which originally procured for it the repute of being an aphrodisiac.] or serapias, a vegetable production with leaves like those of the leek, a stem a palm in height, a purple flower, and a twofold root, formed of tuberosities which resemble the testes in appearance. The larger of these tuberosities, or, as some say, the harder of the two, taken in water, is provocative of lust; while the smaller, or, in other words, the softer one, taken in goat’s milk, acts as an antaphrodisiac. Some persons describe this plant as having a leaf like that of the squill, only smoother and softer, and a prickly stem. The roots heal liberations of the mouth, and are curative of pituitous discharges from the chest; taken in wine they act astringently upon the bowels.

Satyrion is also a powerful stimulant. There are two kinds of it: the first [Identified by Desfontaines with the Orchis pyramidalis, and by Fée with the O. papilionacea of Linnæus. Littré gives the Limodorum abortivum.] has leaves like those of the olive, but longer, a stem four fingers in length, a purple flower, and a double root, resembling the human testes in shape. This root swells and increases in volume one year, and resumes its original size the next. The other kind is known as the “satyrios orchis,” [He is probably speaking of the Cratægonon of B. xxii. c. 40, which Fée identifies with the Thelygonon of c. 91 of this Book. He remarks that from the description, the Satyrios orchis cannot have been a Monocotyledon.] and is supposed to be the female plant. It is distinguished from the former one by the distance between its joints, and its more branchy and shrublike form. The root is employed in philtres: it is mostly found growing near the sea. Beaten up and applied with polenta, [See B. xviii. c. 14.] or by itself, it heals tumours and various other affections of the generative organs. The root of the first kind, administered in the milk of a colonic [See B. viii. c. 72.] sheep, causes tentigo; taken in water it produces a contrary effect.
