---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 92-110."
chapter_order: 185
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 92. (13.)—The Anagallis, or Corchoron; Two Varieties of It: Six Remedies.

The anagallis is called “corchoron” [The Corchorus of B. xxi. c. 106, is most probably altogether a different plant.] by some. There are two kinds of it, the male [Identified with the Anagallis arvensis of Linnæus, with a red flower, the Red pimpernel, Corn pimpernel, or Shepherd’s weather-glass.] plant, with a red blossom, and the female, [The Anagallis cæruleo flore of Tournefort, the Blue pimpernel.] with a blue flower. These plants do not exceed a palm in height, and have a tender stem, with diminutive leaves of a rounded form, drooping upon the ground. They grow in gardens and in spots covered with water, the blue anagallis being the first to blossom. The juice [In reality they are destitute of medicinal properties. It is said, though apparently on no sufficient grounds, that red pimpernel is poisonous to small birds.] of either plant, applied with honey, disperses films upon the eyes, suffusions of blood [Or “blood-shot eyes.”] in those organs resulting from blows, and argema [A disease of the pupil.] with a red tinge: if used in combination with Attic honey, they are still more efficacious. The anagallis has the effect also of dilating [Belladonna, a preparation from the Atropa belladonna, is now generally used for this purpose.] the pupil; hence the eye is anointed with it before the operation of couching [“Paracentesis.”] for cataract. These plants are employed also for diseases of the eyes in beasts of burden.

The juice, injected into the nostrils, which are then rinsed with wine, acts as a detergent upon the head: it is taken also, in doses of one drachma, in wine, for wounds inflicted by serpents. It is a remarkable fact, that cattle will refuse to touch the female plant; but if it should so happen that, deceived by the resemblance—the flower being the only distinguishing mark—they have accidentally tasted it, they immediately have recourse, as a remedy, to the plant called “asyla,” [This plant is unknown. Fée suggests that Pliny may have made a mistake, and that the account from which he copies may have been, that when cattle have been stung by the asilus, or gadfly, they have recourse to the Anagallis.] but more generally known among us as “ferus oculus.” [“Savage eye.”] Some persons recommend those who gather it, to prelude by saluting it before sunrise, and then, before uttering another word, to take care and extract the juice immediately; if this is done, they say, it will be doubly efficacious.

As to the juice of euphorbia, we have spoken [In c. 38 of this Book.] of its properties at sufficient length already. In cases of ophthalmia, attended with swelling, it will be a good plan to apply wormwood beaten up with honey, as well as powdered betony.

### Chap. 93.—The Ægilops: Two Remedies.

The fistula of the eye, called “ægilops,” is cured by the agency of the plant of the same name, [See B. xviii. c. 44, and B. xxi. c. 63.] which grows among barley, and has a leaf like that of wheat. The seed is pounded for the purpose, and applied with meal; or else the juice is extracted from the stem and more pulpy leaves, the ears being first removed. This juice is incorporated with meal of three-month wheat, and divided into lozenges.

### Chap. 94.—Mandragora, Circæon, Morion, or Hippophlomos; Two Varieties of It: Twenty-four Remedies.

Some persons, too, were in the habit of employing mandragora for diseases of the eyes; but more recently, the use of it for such a purpose has been abandoned. It is a well-ascertained fact, however, that the root, beaten up with rose oil and wine, is curative of defluxions of the eyes and pains in those organs; and, indeed, the juice of this plant still forms an ingredient in many medicaments for the eyes. Some persons give it the name of “circæon.” [Or “Plant of Circe.”] There are two varieties, the white [Identified by Fée with the Atropa mandragora vernalis of Bertolini, the Spring mandrake.] mandragora, which is generally thought to be the male plant, and the black, [The Atropa mandragora autumnalis of Bertolini, the Autumnal mandrake.] which is considered to be the female. It has a leaf narrower than that of the lettuce, a hairy stem, and a double or triple root, black without and white within, soft and fleshy, and nearly a cubit in length.

Both kinds bear a fruit about the size of a hazel-nut, enclosing a seed resembling the pips of a pear in appearance. The name given to the white plant by some persons is “arsen,” [The Greek for “male.”] by others “morion,” [“Dementing.” Fée remarks that the “Morion” in reality is a different plant, and queries whether it may not be the Atropa belladonna of Linnæus, the Belladonna, or Deadly nightshade, mentioned above in Note 864.] and by others again, “hippophlomos.” The leaves of it are white, while those of the other one [The female, or black, mandrake.] are broader, and similar to those of garden lapathum [See B. xx. c. 85.] in appearance. Persons, when about to gather this plant, take every precaution not to have the wind blowing in their face; and after tracing three circles round it with a sword, turn towards the west and dig it up. [The superstitions with reference to the Mandrake extended from the earliest times till a very recent period. It was used in philtres, and was supposed to utter piercing cries when taken up; Josephus counsels those whose business it is to do so, to employ a dog for the purpose if they would avoid dreadful misfortunes. All these notions probably arose from the resemblance which the root bears to the legs and lower part of the human body. See B. xxii. c. 9, where we have queried in a Note whether the Eryngium may not have been the “mandrake,” the possession of which was so much coveted by the wives of Jacob.] The juice is extracted both from the fruit and from the stalk, the top being first removed; also from the root, which is punctured for the purpose, or else a decoction is made of it. The filaments, too, of the root are made use of, and it is sometimes cut up into segments and kept in wine.

It is not the mandragora of every country that will yield a juice, but where it does, it is about vintage time that it is collected: it has in all cases a powerful odour, that of the root and fruit the most so. The fruit is gathered when ripe, and dried in the shade; and the juice, when extracted, is left to thicken in the sun. The same is the case, too, with the juice of the root, which is extracted either by pounding it or by boiling it down to one third in red wine. The leaves are best, kept in brine; indeed, when fresh, the juice of them is a baneful poison, [“Pestis est.”] and these noxious properties are far from being entirely removed, even when they are preserved in brine. The very odour of them is highly oppressive to the head, although there are countries in which the fruit is eaten. Persons ignorant of its properties are apt to be struck dumb by the odour of this plant when in excess, and too strong a dose of the juice is productive of fatal effects.

Administered in doses proportioned to the strength of the patient, this juice has a narcotic effect; a middling dose being one cyathus. It is given, too, for injuries inflicted by serpents, and before incisions or punctures are made in the body, in order to ensure insensibility to the pain. [In the same way that chloroform is now administered.] Indeed, for this last purpose, with some persons, the odour of it is quite sufficient to induce sleep. The juice is taken also as a substitute for hellebore, in doses of two oboli, in honied wine: hellebore, however, is more efficacious as an emetic, and as an evacuant of black bile.

### Chap. 95.—Hemlock: Thirteen Remedies.

Hemlock, [“Cicuta.” Identified with the Conium maculatum of Linnæus, Common hemlock or Keghs. It grows in the vicinity of Athens, and probably formed the basis of the poisons with which that volatile people “recompensed,” as Fée remarks, the virtues and exploits of their philosophers and generals. Socrates, Phocion, and Philopœmen, are said to have been poisoned with hemlock; but in the case of Socrates, it was probably combined with opium and other narcotics. See B. xiv. cc. 7, 28, and B. xxiii. c. 23.] too, is a poisonous plant, rendered odious by the use made of it by the Athenian people, as an instrument of capital punishment: still, [He has more than once stated, that it is not his object to enter into a description of poisons.] however, as it is employed for many useful purposes, it must not be omitted. It is the seed that is noxious, the stalk being eaten by many people, either green, or cooked [Fée doubts if it is possible to eat it, boiled even, with impunity.] in the saucepan. This stem is smooth, jointed like a reed, of a swarthy hue, often as much as two cubits in height, and branchy at the top. The leaves are like those of coriander, only softer, and possessed of a powerful odour. The seed is more substantial than that of anise, and the root is hollow and never used. The seed and leaves are possessed of refrigerating properties; indeed, it is owing to these properties that it is so fatal, the cold chills with which it is attended commencing at the extremities. The great remedy [See B. xiv. cc. 7, 28, and B. xxiii. c. 23.] for it, provided it has not reached the vitals, is wine, which is naturally of a warming tendency; but if it is taken in wine, it is irremediably fatal.

A juice is extracted from the leaves and flowers; for it is at the time of its blossoming that it is in its full vigour. The seed is crushed, and the juice extracted from it is left to thicken in the sun, and then divided into lozenges. This preparation proves fatal by coagulating the blood—another deadly property which belongs to it; and hence it is that the bodies of those who have been poisoned by it are covered with spots. It is sometimes used in combination with water as a medium for diluting certain medicaments. An emollient poultice is also prepared from this juice, for the purpose of cooling the stomach; but the principal use made of it is as a topical application, to check defluxions of the eyes in summer, and to allay pains in those organs. It is employed also as an ingredient in eyesalves, and is used for arresting fluxes in other parts of the body: the leaves, too, have a soothing effect upon all kinds of pains and tumours, and upon defluxions of the eyes.

Anaxilaüs makes a statement to the effect, that if the mamillæ [A very dangerous use of it, Desfontaines thinks.] are rubbed with hemlock during virginity, they will always be hard and firm: but a better-ascertained fact is, that applied [Desfontaines says that it is still employed in various ways when the milk is in excess.] to the mamillæ, it dries up the milk in women recently delivered; as also that, applied to the testes at the age of puberty, it acts most effectually as an antaphrodisiac. [By causing those organs to waste away.] As to those cases in which it is recommended to take it internally as a remedy, I shall, for my own part, decline to mention them. The most powerful hemlock is that grown at Susa, in Parthia, the next best being the produce of Laconia, Crete, and Asia. [The province of Asia Minor.] In Greece, the hemlock of the finest quality is that of Megara, and next to it, that of Attica.

### Chap. 96.—Crethmos Agrios: One Remedy.

Crethmos agrios, [“Wild crethmos.” Generally identified with the Crithmum maritimum of Linnæus, Small samphire, or sea fennel.] applied to the eyes, removes rheum; and, with the addition of polenta, it causes tumours to disappear.

### Chap. 97.—Molybdæna: One Remedy.

Molybdæna [Or “lead plant.” Identified with the Plumbago Europæa of Linnæus, Leadwort, or French dittander.] also grows everywhere in the fields, a plant commonly known as “plumbago.” [Or “lead plant.” Identified with the Plumbago Europæa of Linnæus, Leadwort, or French dittander.] It has leaves like those of lapathum, [See B. xx. c. 85.] and a thick, hairy root. Chewed and applied to the eye from time to time, it removes the disease called “plum-bum,” [“Lead disease,” apparently; livid spots on the eyelids, Hardouin thinks.] which affects that organ.

### Chap. 98.—The First Kind of Capnos, Known Also as Chicken’s Foot: One Remedy.

The first kind of capnos, [Or “smoke-plant;” so called from its smell, which resembles that of smoke or soot.] known also as “chicken’s foot,” [“Pedes gallinacei.” Identified by Fée with the Corydalis digitata of Persoon, or else the C. bulbosa, or C. fabacea, several varieties of Fumitory.] is found growing on walls and hedges: it has very thin, straggling branches, with a purple blossom. It is used in a green state, and the juice of it disperses films upon the eyes; hence it is that it is employed as an ingredient in medicinal compositions for the eyes.

### Chap. 99.—The Arborescent Capnos: Three Remedies.

There is another kind [Identified by Fée with the Fumaria parvifolia of Lamarck, Small-leaved fumitory, or Earth-smoke. Other varieties of Fumitory have also been mentioned.] of capnos also, similar both in name and properties, but different in appearance. It is a branchy plant, is extremely delicate, has leaves like those of coriander, is of an ashy colour, and bears a purple flower: it grows in gardens, and amid crops of barley. Employed in the form of an ointment for the eyes, it improves the sight, producing tears in the same way that smoke does, to which, in fact, it owes its name. It has the effect also of preventing the eyelashes, when pulled out, from growing again.

### Chap. 100.—The Acoron or Agrion: Fourteen Remedies.

The acoron [The Acorus calamus of Linnæus, Sweet cane, or Sweet-smelling flag. See B. xii. c. 48.] has leaves similar to those of the iris, [See B. xxi. c. 19.] only narrower, and with a longer stalk; the roots of it are black, and not so veined, but in other respects are similar to those of the iris, have an acrid taste and a not unpleasant smell, and act as a carminative. The best roots are those grown in Pontus, the next best those of Galatia, and the next those of Crete; but it is in Colchis, on the banks of the river Phasis, and in various other watery localities, that they are found in the greatest abundance. When fresh, they have a more powerful odour than when kept for some time: these of Crete are more blanched than the produce of Pontus. They are cut into pieces about a finger in length, and dried in leather bags [“Utribus.”] in the shade.

There are some authors who give the name of “acoron” to the root of the oxymyrsine; [See B. xv. c. 7.] for which reason also some prefer giving that plant the name of “acorion.” It has powerful properties as a calorific and resolvent, and is taken in drink for cataract and films upon the eyes; the juice also is extracted, and taken for injuries inflicted by serpents.

### Chap. 101.—The Cotyledon: Two Varieties of It: Sixty-one Remedies.

The cotyledon [Identified with the Cotyledon umbilicus of Smith, Flor. Brit., Navel-wort, Kidney-wort, or Wall penny-wort.] is a small herbaceous plant, with a diminutive, tender stem, and an unctuous leaf, with a concave surface like that of the cotyloïd cavity of the thigh. It grows in maritime and rocky localities, is of a green colour, and has a rounded root like an olive: the juice of it is remedial for diseases of the eyes.

There is another [Identified by Littré with the Saxifraga media of Gouan; and by Fée with the Cotyledon serrata of Linnæus, Saw-toothed navel-wort.] kind also of the same plant, the leaves of which are of a dirty green [“Sordidis.”] colour, larger than those of the other, and growing in greater numbers about the root, which is surrounded with them just as the eye is with the socket. These leaves have a remarkably astringent taste, and the stem is of considerable length, but extremely slender. This plant is employed for the same purposes as the iris and aizoüm.

### Chap. 102.—The Greater Aizoüm, Also Called Buphthalmos, Zoöphthalmos, Stergethron, Hypogeson, Ambrosion, Amerimnon, Sedum Magnum, or Digitellus: Thirty-six Remedies. The Smaller Aizoüm, Also Called Erithales, Trithales, Chrysothales, Isoëtes or Sedum: Thirty-two Remedies.

Of the plant known as aizoüm [“Always living.”] there are two kinds; the larger of which is sown in earthen pots. By some persons it is known as “buphthalmos,” [“Bull’s eye,” “living eye,” and “love exciter.” The Sempervivum tectorum of Linnæus, common Houseleek or Sengreene.] and by others as “zoöphthalmos,” or else as “stergethron,” because it forms an ingredient in the composition of philtres. Another name given to it is “hypogeson,” from the circumstance that it generally grows upon the eaves [Called “geisa” in Greek.] of houses: some persons, again, give it the names of “ambrosion” and “amerimnon.” In Italy it is known as “sedum magnum,” [“Great houseleek,” “eye,” or “little finger.”] “oculus,” or “digitellus.” The other kind [Fée identifies it with the Sedum ochroleucum of Sibthorp; Sprengel with the Sedum altissimum, and others with the Sedum acre, varieties of Wall pepper, or Stone-crop. Littré gives the Sedum amplexicaule of Decandolle.] of aizoüm is more diminutive, and is known by some persons as “erithales” [“Spring blossoming.”] and by others as “trithales,” from the circumstance that it blossoms three times in the year. Other names given to it are “chrysothales” [“Blossoming like gold.”] and “isoëtes:” [“The same all the year.”] but aizoüm is the common appellation of them both, from their being always green.

The larger kind exceeds a cubit in height, and is somewhat thicker than the thumb: at the extremity, the leaves are similar to a tongue in shape, and are fleshy, unctuous, full of juice, and about as broad as a person’s thumb. Some are bent downwards towards the ground, while others again stand upright, the outline of them resembling an eye in shape. The smaller kind grows upon walls, old rubbish of houses, and tiled roofs; it is branchy from the root, and covered with leaves to the extremity. These leaves are narrow, pointed, and juicy: the stem is a palm in height, and the root is never used.

### Chap. 103.—The Andrachle Agria or Illecebra: Thirty-two Remedies.

A similar plant is that known to the Greeks by the name of “andrachle agria,” [“Wild andrachle.” Desfontaines identifies it with the Sedum stellatum; Fée, though with some hesitation, with the Sedum reflexum of Linnæus, the Sharp-pointed stone-crop, or Prick-madam. The Sedum, however, is of a caustic and slightly corrosive nature, and not edible; in which it certainly differs from the Andrachle agria of our author. Holland calls it “Wild purslain.”] and by the people of Italy as the “illecebra.” Its leaves, though small, are larger than those of the last-named plant, but growing on a shorter stem. It grows in craggy localities, and is gathered for use as food. All these plants have the same properties, being cooling and astringent. The leaves, applied topically, or the juice, in form of a liniment, are curative of defluxions of the eyes: this juice too acts as a detergent upon ulcers of the eyes, makes new flesh, and causes them to cicatrize; it [This is probably the meaning of “palpebras deglutinat.”] cleanses the eyelids also of viscous matter. Applied to the temples, both the leaves and the juice of these plants are remedial for head-ache; they neutralize the venom also of the phalangium; and the greater aizoüm, in particular, is an antidote to aconite. It is asserted, too, that those who carry this last plant about them will never be stung by the scorpion.

These plants are curative of pains in the ears; which is the case also with juice of henbane, applied in moderate quantities, of achillea, [See c. 19 of this Book.] of the smaller centaury and plantago, of peucedanum in combination with rose-oil and opium, and of acoron [See c. 100 of this Book.] mixed with rose-leaves. In all these cases, the liquid is made warm, and introduced into the ear with the aid of a syringe. [“Strigil.” This in general means a “body-scraper;” but it most probably signifies a “syringe,” in the present instance. See B. xxix c. 39, and B. xxxi c. 47.] The cotyledon is good, too, for suppurations in the ears, mixed with deer’s marrow made hot. The juice of pounded root of ebulum [See B. xxiv. c. 35.] is strained through a linen cloth, and then left to thicken in the sun: when wanted for use, it is moistened with oil of roses, and made hot, being employed for the cure of imposthumes of the parotid glands. Vervain and plantago are likewise used for the cure of the same malady, as also sideritis, [See c. 19 of this Book.] mixed with stale axle-grease.

### Chap. 104.—A Remedy for Diseases of the Nostrils.

Aristolochia, [See c. 54 of this Book.] mixed with cyperus, [See B. xxi. cc. 69, 70.] is curative of polypus of the nose. [“Ozænam.”]

### Chap. 105.—Remedies for Diseases of the Teeth.

The following are remedies for diseases of the teeth: root of panaces, [See c. 11 of this Book.] chewed, that of the chironion in particular, and juice of panaces, used as a collutory; root, too, of henbane, chewed with vinegar, and root of polemonia. [See c. 28 of this Book.] The root of plantago is chewed for a similar purpose, or the teeth, are rinsed with a decoction of the juice mixed with vinegar. The leaves, too, are said to be useful for the gums, when swollen with sanious blood, or if there are discharges of blood therefrom. The seed, too, of plantago is a cure for abscesses in the gums, and for gum-boils. Aristolochia has a strengthening effect upon the gums and teeth; and the same with vervain, either chewed with the root of that plant, or boiled in wine and vinegar, the decoction being employed as a gargle. The same is the case, also, with root of cinquefoil, boiled down to one third, in wine or vinegar; before it is boiled, however, the root should be washed in sea or salt water: the decoction, too, must be kept a considerable time in the mouth. Some persons prefer cleaning the teeth with ashes of cinquefoil.

Root of verbascum [See c. 73 of this Book.] is also boiled in wine, and the decoction used for rinsing the teeth. The same is done too with hyssop and juice of peucedanum, mixed with opium; or else the juice of the root of anagallis, [See c. 92 of this Book.] the female plant in particular, is injected into the nostril on the opposite side to that in which the pain is felt.

### Chap. 106.—Erigeron, Pappus, Acanthis, or Senecio: Eight Remedies.

Erigeron [Identified by Desfontaines with the Senecio Jacobæa of Linnæus, Common ragwort. Fée identifies it with the Senecio vulgaris of Linnæus, our Groundsel. They are both destitute of medicinal properties.] is called by our people “senecio.” It is said that if a person, after tracing around this plant with an implement of iron, takes it up and touches the tooth affected with it three times, taking care to spit each time on the ground, and then replaces it in the same spot, so as to take root again, he will never experience any further pain in that tooth. This plant has just the appearance and softness of trixago, [Sec B. xxiv. c. 80.] with a number of small reddish-coloured stems: it is found growing upon walls, and the tiled roofs of houses. The Greeks have given it the name of “erigeron,” [Ἔαρι γέρων, “aged,” or “hoary in spring.”] because it is white in spring. The head is divided into numerous downy filaments, which resemble those of the thorn, [“Spinæ.” He probably uses a wrong term, and means “thistle.”] protruding from between the divisions of the head: hence it is that Callimachus has given it the name of “acanthis,” [It may possibly have been so called from the Acanthis, or goldfinch, that bird being fond of groundsel.] while others, again, call it “pappus. [“Thistle-down.” If Pliny is speaking of groundsel, he is wrong in his assertion that it turns white, or in other words, goes to seed, in spring.] ”

After all, however, the Greek writers are by no means agreed as to this plant; some say, for instance, that it has leaves like those of rocket, while others maintain that they resemble those of the robur, only that they are considerably smaller. Some, again, assert that the root is useless, while others aver that it is beneficial for the sinews, and others that it produces suffocation, if taken in drink. On the other hand, some have prescribed it in wine, for jaundice and all affections of the bladder, heart, and liver, and give it as their opinion that it carries off gravel from the kidneys. It has been prescribed, also, by them for sciatica, the patient taking one drachma in oxymel, after a walk; and has been recommended as extremely useful for griping pains in the bowels, taken in raisin wine. They assert, also, that used as an aliment with vinegar, it is wholesome for the thoracic organs, and recommend it to be grown in the garden for these several purposes.

In addition to this, there are some authorities to be found, which distinguish another variety of this plant, but without mentioning its peculiar characteristics. This last they recommend to be taken in water, to neutralize the venom of serpents, and prescribe it to be eaten for the cure of epilepsy. For my own part, however, I shall only speak of it in accordance with the uses made of it among us Romans, uses based upon the results of actual experience. The down of this plant, beaten up with saffron and a little cold water, is applied to defluxions of the eyes; parched with a little salt, it is employed for the cure of scrofulous sores.

### Chap. 107.—The Ephemeron: Two Remedies.

The ephemeron [Sprengel identifies it with the Ornithogalum stachyoïdes; but that has no blue flower, and the same is the case with many other plants that have been suggested as its synonym. Fée suggests the Convallaria verticillata of Linnæus, the whorl-leaved Solomon’s seal; as to which, however, there is the same difficulty in reference to the flower. Holland calls it the “May lily,” otherwise the Lily of the valley, the Convallaria Maialis; and this is the synonym suggested by Fuchsius. Littré gives the Convallaria multiflora of Linnæus.] has leaves like those of the lily, but smaller; a stem of the same height, a blue flower, and a seed of which no use is made. The root is single, about the thickness of one’s finger, and an excellent remedy for diseases of the teeth; for which purpose it is cut up in pieces, and boiled in vinegar, the decoction being used warm as a collutory. The root, too, is employed by itself to strengthen the teeth, being inserted for the purpose in those that are hollow or carious.

Root of chelidonia [See c. 50 of this Book.] is also beaten up with vinegar, and kept in the mouth. Black hellebore is sometimes inserted in carious teeth; and a decoction of either of these last-mentioned plants, in vinegar, has the effect of strengthening loose teeth.

### Chap. 108.—The Labrum Venereum: One Remedy.

Labrum Venereum [Or “Venus’ bath.” Identified by Littré with the Dipsacus silvestris of Linnæus, and by Fée with the Dipsacus fullonum of Linnæus, the Teazel, or Fuller’s thistle. It received its Roman name from the form of the leaves, which are channelled, and curved at the edges.] is the name given to a plant that grows in running streams. [This is entirely erroneous; he may possibly have mistranslated some author, who has stated that the rain-water settles in reservoirs formed by the leaves.] It produces a small worm, [He alludes to the larvæ of the Curculio or weevil, which are found in the head of the Dipsacus, and many other plants. See B. xxvii. c. 62, and B. xxx. c. 8.] which is crushed by being rubbed upon the teeth, or else enclosed in wax and inserted in the hollow of the tooth. Care must be taken, however, that the plant, when pulled up, does not touch the ground.

### Chap. 109.—The Batrachion, Ranunculus, or Strumus; Four Varieties of It: Fourteen Remedies.

The plant known to the Greeks as “batrachion,” [“Frog-plant.”] we call ranunculus. [“Little frog.” Called “Crow-foot” by us.] There are four varieties of it, [Sprengel identifies it with the Ranunculus Seguieri, Fée with the R. Asiaticus, also a native of Greece.] one of which has leaves somewhat thicker than those of coriander, nearly the size of those of the mallow, and of a livid hue: the stem of the plant is long and slender, and the root white; it grows on moist and well-shaded embankments. The second [Identified by Desfontaines with the Ranunculus hirsutus, or philonotis. Fée, with Hardouin, considers it to be the same as the Apiastrum of B. xx. c. 45, and identifies it with the Ranunculus Sardoüs of Crantz, the plant probably which produces a contraction of the mouth, rendered famous as the “Sardonic grin,” and more commonly known as the Ranunculus sceleratus, Apium risus, or Apium Sardoüm, “Laughing parsley,” or “Sardinian parsley.”] kind is more foliated than the preceding one, the leaves have more numerous incisions, and the stems of the plant are long. The third [Identified by Sprengel and Desfontaines with the Ranunculus repens. or Creeping crow-foot; but by Fée, with the Ranunculus muricatus of Linnæus.] variety is smaller than the others, has a powerful smell, and a flower of a golden colour. The fourth [Identified by Desfontaines with the Ranunculus aconitifolius; by Fée with the Ranunculus aquatilis of Linnæus, the Water crowfoot. The Ranunculi are all active poisons.] kind is very like the one last mentioned, but the flower is milk-white.

All these plants have caustic properties: if the leaves are applied unboiled, they raise blisters like those caused by the action of fire; hence it is that they are used for the removal of leprous spots, itch-scabs, and brand marks upon the skin. They form an ingredient also in all caustic preparations, and are applied for the cure of alopecy, care being taken to remove them very speedily. The root, if chewed for some time, in cases of tooth-ache, will cause [A fabulous assertion, probably, and it is very doubtful if any one ever made the trial of its efficacy.] the teeth to break; dried and pulverized, it acts as a sternutatory.

Our herbalists give this plant the name of “strumus,” from the circumstance of its being curative of strumous [Or scrofula.] sores and inflamed tumours, for which purpose a portion of it is hung up in the smoke. It is a general belief, too, with them, that if it is replanted, the malady so cured will reappear [See B xxi. c 83, and B. xxvi. c. 5.] —a criminal practice, for which the plantago is also employed. The juice of this last-mentioned plant is curative of internal ulcerations of the mouth; and the leaves and root are chewed for a similar purpose, even when the mouth is suffering from defluxions. Cinquefoil effects the cure of ulcerations and offensive breath; psyllium [See c. 90 of this Book.] is used also for ulcers of the mouth.

### Chap. 110.—Remedial Preparations for Offensive Breath: Two Kinds of Them.

We shall also here make mention of certain preparations for the cure of offensive breath—a most noisome inconvenience. For this purpose, leaves of myrtle and lentisk are taken in equal proportions, with one half the quantity of Syrian nut-galls; they are then pounded together and sprinkled with old wine, and the composition is chewed in the morning. In similar cases, also, ivy berries are used, in combination with cassia and myrrh; these ingredients being mixed, in equal proportions, with wine.

For offensive odours of the nostrils, even though attended with carcinoma, the most effectual remedy is seed of dracontium [See B. xxiv. cc. 91, 93.] beaten up with honey. An application of hyssop has the effect of making bruises disappear. Brand marks [“Stigmata.”] in the face are healed by rubbing them with mandragora. [See c. 94 of this Book.]

Summary. —Remedies, narratives, and observations, twelve hundred and ninety-two.

Roman authors quoted. —C. Valgius, [See end of B. xx.] Pompeius Lenæus, [See end of B. xiv.] Sextius Niger [See end of B. xii.] who wrote in Greek, Julius Bassus [See end of B. xx.] who wrote in Greek, Antonius Castor, [See end of B. xx.] Cornelius Celsus, [See end of B. vii.] Fabianus. [For Fabianus Papirius, see end of B. ii.; for Fabianus Sabinus, see end of B. xviii.]

Foreign authors quoted. —Theophrastus, [See end of B. iii.] Apollodorus, [See end of B. xi.] Democritus, [See end of B. ii.] Juba, [See end of B. v.] Orpheus, [See end of B. xx.] Pythagoras, [See end of B. ii.] Mago, [See end of B. viii.] Menander [See end of B. xix.] who wrote the “Biochresta,” Nicander, [See end of B. viii.] Homer, Hesiod, [See end of B. vii.] Musæus, [See end of B. xxi.] Sophocles, [See end of B. xxi.] Xanthus, [A Lydian historian, anterior to Herodotus, of whom little is known with any degree of certainty. He probably flourished in the earlier part of the fifth century B.C.] Anaxilaüs. [See end of B. xxi.]

Medical authors quoted. —Mnesitheus, [See end of B. xxi.] Callimachus, [See end of B. iv.] Phanias [See end of B. xxi.] the physician, Timaristus, [See end of B. xxi.] Simus, [See end of B. xxi.] Hippocrates, [See end of B. vii.] Chrysippus, [See end of B. xx.] Diocles, [See end of B. xx.] Ophelion, [See end of B. xx.] Heraclides, [See end of B. xii.] Hicesius, [See end of B. xv.] Dionysius, [See end of B. xii.] Apollodorus [See end of B. xx.] of Citium, Apollodorus [See end of B. xx.] of Tarentum, Praxagoras, [See end of B. xx.] Plistonicus, [See end of B. xx.] Medius, [See end of B. xx.] Dieuches, [See end of B. xx.] Cleophantus, [See end of B. xx.] Philistion, [See end of B. xx.] Asclepiades, [See end of B. vii.] Crateuas, [See end of B. xx.] Petronius Diodotus, [See end of B. xx.] Iollas, [See end of B. xii.] Erasistratus, [See end of B. xi.] Diagoras, [See end of B. xii.] Andreas, [See end of B. xx.] Mnesides, [See end of B. xii.] Epicharmus, [See end of B. xx.] Damion, [See end of B. xx.] Sosimenes, [See end of B. xx.] Tlepolemus, [See end of B. xx.] Metrodorus, [See end of B. xx.] Solon, [See end of B. xx.] Lycus, [See end of B. xii.] Olympias [See end of B. xx.] of Thebes, Philinus, [See end of B. xx.] Petrichus, [See end of B. xix.] Micton, [See end of B. xx.] Glaucias, [See end of B. xx.] Xenocrates. [See end of B. xx.]
