---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 63-82."
chapter_order: 189
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 63.—Satyrion: Three Medicinal Properties. Satyrion Erythraïcon: Four Medicinal Properties.

The Greeks give the name of “satyrion” [Littré identifies it with the Aceras anthropophora of Linnæus; Desfontaines with the Orchis bifolia, the Butterfly orchis. The Iris florentina of Linnæus has also been named; but, though with some doubt, Fée is inclined to prefer the Tulipa Clusiana, or some other kind of tulip.] to a plant with red leaves like those of the lily, but smaller, not more than three of them making their appearance above ground. The stem, they say, is smooth and bare and a cubit in length, and the root double; the lower part, which is also the larger, promoting the conception of male issue, the upper or smaller part, that of female.

They distinguish also another kind of satyrion, by the name of “erythraïcon:” [Mostly identified with the Erythronium dens canis of Linnæus, the Dog’s tooth violet. M. Fraäs, however, in his Synopsis, p. 279, remarks that the E. dens canis is not to be found in Greece, and is of opinion that the Fritillaria Pyrenaica, the Pyrenean lily, or Fritillary, is meant. The Serapias cordigera of Linnæus has been suggested, and Fée thinks that it is as likely to be the plant meant by Pliny as any other that has been named.] it has seed like that of the vitex, [See B. xxiv. c. 38.] only larger, smooth, and hard; the root, they say, is covered with a red rind, and is white within and of a sweetish taste: it is mostly found in mountainous districts. The root, we are told, if only held in the hand, acts as a powerful aphrodisiac, and even more so, if it is taken in rough, astringent wine. It is administered in drink, they say, to rams and he-goats when inactive and sluggish; and the people of Sarmatia are in the habit of giving it to their stallions when fatigued with covering, a defect to which they give the name of “prosedamum.” The effects of this plant are neutralized by the use of hydromel or lettuces. [See B. xix. c. 38.]

The Greeks, however, give the general name of “satyrion” to all substances of a stimulating tendency, to the cratægis [“Cratægonon” is most probably the correct reading. See B. xvi. c. 52, and B. xxvii. c. 40.] for example, the thelygonon, [See c. 91 of this Book.] and the arrenogonon, plants, the seed of which bears a resemblance to the testes. [Of the three plants named, the Thelygonon is the only one to which this assertion will apply. See c. 91 of this Book, and B. xxvii. c. 40.] Persons who carry the pith of branches of tithymalos [See B. xxvi. c. 39.] about them, are rendered more amorous thereby, it is said. The statements are really incredible, which Theophrastus, [Hist. Plant. B. ix. c. 20.] in most cases an author of high authority, makes in relation to this subject; thus, for instance, he says that by the contact only of a certain plant, a man has been enabled, in the sexual congress, to repeat his embraces as many as seventy times even! The name and genus, however, of this plant, he has omitted to mention.

### Chap. 64.—Remedies for the Gout and Diseases of the Feet.

Sideritis, [See B. xxv. c. 19.] attached to the body as an amulet, reduces varicose veins, and effects a painless cure. Gout used to be an extremely rare disease, not in the times of our fathers and grandfathers only, but within my own memory even. Indeed, it may justly be considered a foreign complaint; for if it had been formerly known in Italy, it would surely have found a Latin name. It should, however, by no means be looked upon as an incurable malady; for before now, in many instances, it has quitted the patient all at once, and still more frequently, a cure has been effected by proper treatment.

For the cure of gout, roots of panaces [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] are used, mixed with raisins; juice of henbane, or the seed, combined with meal; scordion, [See B. xxv. c. 27.] taken in vinegar; iberis, as already mentioned; [In B. xxv. c. 49. None of these so-called remedies are now employed.] vervain, beaten up with axle-grease; or root of cyclaminos, [See B. xxv. c. 67.] a decoction of which is good also for chilblains.

As cooling applications for gout, root of xiphion [See B. xxv. cc. 88, 89.] is used; seed of psyllion; [See B. xxv. c. 90.] hemlock, with litharge or axle-grease; and, at the first symptoms of red gout, or, in other words, hot gout, the plant aizoüm. [See B. xxv c. 102.] For either kind of gout, erigeron, [See B. xxv. c. 106.] with axle-grease, is very useful; leaves of plantago, beaten up with a little salt; or argemonia, [See B. xxv. c. 56.] pounded with honey. An application of vervain is also remedial, and it is a good plan to soak the feet in a decoction of that plant in water.

### Chap. 65. Lappago or Mollugo: One Remedy. Asperugo: One Remedy.

Lappago [See B. xxiv. c. 116.] is employed also for this disease; a plant similar to the anagallis, [See B. xxv. c. 92.] were it not that it is more branchy, bristling with a greater number of leaves, covered with rugosities, full of a more acrid juice, and possessed of a powerful smell. The kind that resembles anagallis most closely, is known as mollugo. [Identified with the Galium mollugo of Linnæus, Great ladies’ bedstraw, or Wild bastard madder.] Asperugo [The Asperugo procumbens of Linnæus has been named, but Fée remarks that from its resemblance to Mollugo, the plant must be sought among the Rubiaceæ, and not among the Borragineæ.] is a similar plant, only with a more prickly leaf. The juice of the first is taken daily, in doses of one denarius, in two cyathi of wine.

### Chap. 66.—Phycos Thalassion or Sea-weed: Three Varieties of It. Lappa Boaria.

But it is the phycos thalassion, or sea-weed, [“Fucus marinus.” See B. xiii. c. 48.] more particularly, that is so excellent a remedy for the gout. It resembles the lettuce in appearance, and is used as the basis in dyeing tissues with the purple of the murex. [“Qui conchyliis substernitur.” See Beckmann’s Hist. Inv. Vol. I. p. 36, Bohn’s Ed.] Used before it becomes dry, it is efficacious as a topical application not only for gout, but for all diseases of the joints. There are three kinds of it; one with a broad leaf, another with a longer leaf of a reddish hue, and a third with a crisped leaf, and used in Crete for dyeing cloths. [What Fucus or Laminaria this may have been is now unknown.] All these kinds have similar properties; and we find Nicander prescribing them in wine as an antidote to the venom of serpents even. The seed also of the plant which we have spoken of as “psyllion,” [See B. xxv. c. 90.] is useful for the cure of gout: it is first steeped in water, and one hemina of the seed is then mixed with two spoonfuls of resin of Colophon, and one spoonful of frankincense. Leaves of mandragora, [See B. xxv. c. 94.] too, are highly esteemed for this purpose, beaten up with polenta.

(11.) For swellings of the ankles, slime, [“Limus aquaticus.”] kneaded up with oil, is wonderfully useful, and for swellings of the joints the juice of the smaller centaury; this last being remarkably good also for diseases of the sinews. Centauris, [See B. xxv. c. 32.] too, is very useful; and for pains in the sinews of the shoulder-blades, shoulders, vertebræ, and loins, an infusion of betony is taken in drink in the same way as for diseases of the liver. [See c. 19 of this Book.] Cinquefoil is applied topically to the joints, and a similar use is made of the leaves of mandragora, mixed with polenta, [See B. xviii c. 14.] or else the root, beaten up fresh with wild cucumber [See B. xx. c. 2.] or boiled in water. For chaps upon the toes, root of polypodion [See c. 37 of this Book.] is used; and for diseases of the joints, juice of henbane with axle-grease; amomum, [See B. xii. c 28.] with a decoction of the plant; centunculus, [See B. xxiv. c. 88.] boiled; or fresh moss steeped in water, and attached to the part till it is quite dry.

The root, too, of lappa boaria, [“Ox lappa.” Possibly the same as the Philanthropos, or else the Lappa canina, both mentioned in B. xxiv. c. 116.] taken in wine, is productive of similar effects. A decoction of cyclaminos [See B. xxv. c. 67.] in water, is curative of chilblains, and all other affections resulting from cold. For chilblains, cotyledon [See B. xxv. c. 101.] is also employed with axle-grease, leaves of batrachion, [See B. xxv. c. 109.] and juice of epithymum. [See B. xii. c. 37, and c. 35 of this Book.] Ladanum, [See B. viii. c. 47.] mixed with castoreum, [See B. viii. c. 47.] and vervain applied with wine, extract corns from the feet.

### Chap. 67.—Maladies Which Attack the Whole of the Body.

Having now finished the detail of the diseases which are perceptible in individual parts of the body, we shall proceed to speak of those which attack the whole of the body. The following I find mentioned as general remedies: in preference to anything else, an infusion of dodecatheos, [See B. xxv. c. 9.] a plant already described, should be taken in drink, and then the roots of the several kinds [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] of panaces, in maladies of long standing more particularly: seed, too, of panaces should be used for intestinal complaints. For all painful affections of the body we find juice of scordium [See B. xxv. c. 27.] recommended, as also that of betony: this last, taken in a potion, is particularly excellent for removing a wan and leaden hue of the skin, and for improving its general appearance.

### Chap. 68.—The Geranion, Myrrilis, or Myrtis; Three Varieties of It: Six Remedies.

The plant geranion has the additional names of “myrrhis” [Not in reality the same plant as the Geranion; see B. xxiv. c. 97. Littré, however, gives the Erodium moschatum of Linnæus as the synonym of this Geranion myrrhis.] and “myrtis.” It is similar to hemlock in appearance, but has a smaller leaf and a shorter stem, rounded, and of a pleasant taste and odour. Such, at all events, is the description given of it by our herbalists; but the Greeks speak of it as bearing leaves a little whiter than those of the mallow, thin downy stems, and branches at intervals some two palms in length, with small heads at their extremities, in the midst of the leaves, resembling the bill [Hence its name, from the Greek γέρανος, a “crane.”] of a crane. [This kind of Geranion has been identified with the Geranium molle, or Erodium malacoïdes of Linnæus, the Common dove’s-foot crane’s bill.] There is also another [Identified with the Geranium tuberosum of Linnæus.] variety of this plant, with leaves like those of the anemone, but with deeper incisions, and a root rounded like an apple, sweet, and extremely useful and refreshing [Fée remarks that all his assertions as to the medicinal properties of the Geranion are erroneous.] for invalids when recovering their strength; this last would almost seem to be the true geranion.

For phthisis this plant is taken, in the proportion of one drachma to three cyathi of wine, twice a day; as also for flatulency. Eaten raw, it is productive of similar effects. The juice of the root is remedial for diseases of the ear; and for opisthotony the seed is taken in drink, in doses of four drachmæ, with pepper and myrrh. Juice of plantago, [See B. xxv. c. 39.] taken in drink, is curative of phthisis, and a decoction of it is equally good for the purpose. Plantago taken as a food with oil and salt, immediately after rising in the morning, is extremely refreshing; it is prescribed, too, in cases of atrophy, on alternate days. Betony is given with honey, in the form of an electuary, for phthisis, in pieces the size of a bean; agaric, too, is taken in doses of two oboli in raisin wine, or else daucus [See B. xxv. c. 64.] with the greater centaury in wine. For the cure of phagedæna, a name given in common to bulimia [Voracious appetite—“sine modo esurientium.”] and to a corrosive kind of ulcer, tithymalos [See B. xxvi. c. 39.] is taken in combination with sesame.

### Chap. 69.—The Onotheras or Onear: Three Remedies.

Among the various evils by which the whole of the body in common is afflicted, that of wakefulness is the most common. Among the remedies for it we find panaces [See B. xxv. cc. 11 and 12.] mentioned, clymenus, [See B. xxv. c. 33.] and aristolochia, [See B. xxv. c. 54.] the odour of the plant being inhaled and the head rubbed with it. Aizoüm, or houseleek, is beneficial, wrapped in black cloth and placed beneath the pillow, without the patient being aware of it. The onotheras [Identified with the Epilobium roseum of Linnæus, Rose-coloured willow-herb.] too, or onear, taken in wine, has certain exhilarating properties; it has leaves like those of the almond tree, a rose-coloured flower, numerous branches, and a long root, with a vinous smell when dried: an infusion of this root has a soothing effect upon wild beasts even.

For fits of indigestion [See c. 25 of this Book.] attended with nausea, betony is taken in drink: used similarly after the evening meal, it facilitates the digestion. Taken in the proportion of one drachma to three cyathi of oxymel, it dispels crapulence. The same is the case, too, with agaric, taken in warm water after eating. Betony is curative of paralysis, it is said; the same, too, with iberis, as already stated. [In B. xxv. c. 49.] This last is good, too, for numbness of the limbs; the same being the case with argemonia, [See B. xxv. c. 56.] a plant which disperses those affections which might otherwise necessitate the application of the knife.

### Chap. 70.—Remedies for Epilepsy.

Epilepsy is cured by the root of the panaces which we have spoken [In B. xxv. c. 12.] of as the “heraclion,” taken in drink with sea-calf’s rennet, the proportions being three parts of panaces and one of rennet. For the same purpose an infusion of plantago [See B. xxv. c. 39.] is taken, or else betony or agaric, with oxymel, the former in doses of one drachma, the latter in doses of three oboli; leaves of cinquefoil are taken, also, in water. Archezostis [See B. xxiii. c. 16.] is also curative of epilepsy, but it must be taken constantly for a year; root of bacchar, [See B. xxi. c. 16.] too, dried and powdered, and taken in warm water, in the proportion of three cyathi to one cyathus of coriander; centunculus [See B. xxiv. c. 88.] also, bruised in vinegar, warm water, or honey; vervain, taken in wine; hyssop [See B. xxv. c. 87.] berries, three in number, pounded and taken in water, for sixteen days consecutively; peucedanum, [See B. xxv. c. 70.] taken in drink with sea-calf’s rennet, in equal proportions; leaves of cinquefoil, bruised in wine and taken for thirty days; powdered betony, in doses of three denarii, with one cyathus of squill vinegar and an ounce of Attic honey; as also scammony, in the proportion of two oboli to four drachmæ of castoreum.

### Chap. 71.—Remedies for Fevers.

Agaric, taken in warm water, alleviates cold fevers: sideritis, in combination with oil, is good for tertian fevers; bruised ladanum [See c. 30 of this Book.] also, which is found in corn fields; plantago, [See B. xxv. c. 39.] taken in doses of two drachmæ, in hydromel, a couple of hours before the paroxysms come on; juice of the root of plantago made warm or subjected to pressure; or else the root itself beaten up in water made warm with a hot iron. Some medical men prescribe three roots of plantago, in three cyathi of water; and in a similar manner, four roots for quartan fevers. When buglossos [See B. xxv. c. 40.] is beginning to wither, if a person takes the pith out of the stem, and says while so doing, that it is for the cure of such and such a person suffering from fever, and then attaches seven leaves to the patient, just before the paroxysms come on, he will experience a cure, they say.

Fevers too, those which are attended with recurrent cold shiverings more particularly, are cured by administering one drachma of betony, or else agaric, in three cyathi of hydromel. Some medical men recommend three leaves of cinquefoil for tertian, four for quartan, and an increased number for other fevers; while others again prescribe in all cases three oboli of cinquefoil, with pepper, in hydromel.

Vervain, administered in water, is curative of fever, in beasts of burden even; but care must be taken, in cases of tertian fever, to cut the plant at the third joint, and of quartan fever at the fourth. The seed of either kind of hypericon [See Chapters 53 and 54 of this Book.] is taken also for quartan fevers and cold shiverings. Powdered betony modifies these fits, and panaces [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] is of so warming a nature that persons when about to travel amid the snow are recommended to drink an infusion of it, and to rub the body all over with the plant. Aristolochia [See B. xxv. c. 54.] also arrests shivering produced by cold.

### Chap. 72.—Remedies for Phrenitis, Lethargy, and Carbuncles.

Phrenitis is cured by sleep induced by the agency of an infusion of peucedanum [See B. xxv. c. 70.] in vinegar, poured upon the head, or else by the juice of either kind of anagallis. [See B. xxv. c. 92.] On the other hand, when patients are suffering from lethargy, it is with the greatest difficulty that they are aroused; a result which may be effected, they say, by touching the nostrils with juice of peucedanum in vinegar. For the cure of insanity, betony is administered in drink. Panaces [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] brings carbuncles to a head, and makes them break; and they are equally cured by powdered betony applied in water, or else cabbage leaves mixed with frankincense in warm water, and taken in considerable quantities. For a similar purpose, a red-hot coal is extinguished in the patient’s presence, and the ashes are taken up with the finger and applied to the sore. Bruised plantago [See B. xxv. c. 39.] is also used for the cure of carbuncles.

### Chap. 73.—Remedies for Dropsy. Acte or Ebulum. Chamæacte.

For the cure of dropsy, tithymalos characias [See c. 39 of this Book.] is employed; panaces [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] also; plantago, [See B. xxv. c. 39.] used as a diet, dry bread being eaten first, without any drink; betony, taken in doses of two drachmæ in two cyathi of ordinary wine or honied wine; agaric or seed of lonchitis, [See B. xxv. c. 88.] in doses of two spoonfuls, in water; psyllion, [See B. xxv. c. 90.] taken in wine; juice of either anagallis; [See B. xxv. c. 92.] root of cotyledon [See B. xxv. c. 101.] in honied wine; root of ebulum, [See B. xxv. c. 71.] fresh gathered, with the mould shaken off, but not washed in water, a pinch in two fingers being taken in one hemina of old wine mulled; root of trefoil, taken in doses of two drachmæ in wine; the tithymalos [See c. 44 of this Book.] known as “platyphyllos;” seed of the hypericon, [See c. 54 of this Book.] otherwise known as “caros;” the plant called “acte”—the same thing as ebulum [See B. xxv. c. 71.] according to some—the root of it being pounded in three cyathi of wine, if there are no symptoms of fever, or the seed of it being administered in red wine; a good handful of vervain also, boiled down in water to one half. But of all the remedies for this disease, juice of chamæacte [See B. xxv. c. 71.] is looked upon as by far the most efficacious.

Morbid or pituitous eruptions are cured by the agency of plantago, or else root of cyclaminos [See B. xxv. c. 67.] with honey. Leaves of ebulum, [See B. xxv. c. 71.] bruised in old wine and applied topically, are curative of the disease called “boa,” which makes its appearance in the form of red pimples. Juice of strychnos, [See B. xxi. c. 105.] applied as a liniment, is curative of prurigo.

### Chap. 74.—Remedies for Erysipelas.

For the cure of erysipelas, aizoüm [See B. xxv. c. 102.] is used, or else pounded leaves of hemlock, or root of mandragora; [See B. xxv. c. 94.] this last being cut into round slices like cucumber and suspended over must, [Or Grape-juice.] after which it is hung up in the smoke, and then pounded in wine or vinegar. It is a good plan too to use fomentations with myrtle wine: two ounces of mint beaten up in vinegar with one ounce of live sulphur, form a mixture sometimes employed; as also soot mixed with vinegar.

There are several kinds of erysipelas, one in particular which attacks the middle of the body, and is known as “zoster:” [The “belt”—known to us as “shingles.”] should it entirely surround the body, its effects are fatal. For this disease, plantago [See B. xxv. c. 39.] is remedial, mixed with Cimolian [See B. xxxv. c. 57.] chalk; vervain, used by itself; or root of persolata. [See B. xxv. c. 66.] For other kinds of erysipelas of a spreading nature, root of cotyledon [See B. xxv. c. 101.] is used, mixed with honied wine; aizoüm also, [See B. xxv. c. 102.] or juice of linozostis, [See B. xxv. c. 18.] in combination with vinegar.

### Chap. 75. (12.)—Remedies for Sprains.

For the cure of sprains, root of polypodion [See c. 37 of this Book.] is used, in the form, of a liniment: the pain and swelling are modified also by using seed of psyllion; [See B. xxv. c. 90.] leaves of plantago [See B. xxv. c. 39.] beaten up with a little salt; seed of verbascum, [See B. xxv. c. 73.] boiled in wine and pounded; or hemlock with axle-grease. Leaves of ephemeron [See B. xxv. c. 107.] are applied topically to tumours and tuberosities, so long as they are capable of being dispersed.

### Chap. 76.—Remedies for Jaundice.

It is upon the eyes in particular that jaundice is productive of so remarkable an effect; the bile penetrating between the membranes, so extremely delicate as they are and so closely united. Hippocrates [B. iv. cc. 62, 64.] tells us that the appearance of jaundice on or after the seventh day in fevers is a fatal symptom; but I am acquainted with some instances in which, the patients survived after having been reduced to this apparently hopeless state. We may remark also, that jaundice sometimes comes on without fever supervening. It is combated by taking the greater centaury, [See B. xxv. c. 30.] as already mentioned, in drink; agaric, in doses of three oboli in old wine; or leaves of vervain, in doses of three oboli, taken for four consecutive days in one hemina of mulled wine. But the most speedy cure of all is effected by using juice of cinquefoil, in doses of three cyathi, with salt and honey. Root of cyclaminos [See B. xxv. c. 67.] is also taken in drink in doses of three drachmæ, the patient sitting in a warm room free from all cold and draughts, the infusion expelling the bile by its action as a sudorific.

Leaves of tussilago [Or Bechion. See B. xxiv. c. 85.] are also used in water for this purpose; the seed of either kind of linozostis, [See B. xxv. c. 19.] sprinkled in the drink, or made into a decoction with chick-pease or wormwood: hyssop berries taken in water; the plant lichen, [See c. 10 of this Book.] all other vegetables being carefully abstained from while it is being used; polythrix, [See B. xxv. c. 83.] taken in wine; and struthion, [See B. xix. c. 18.] in honied wine.

### Chap. 77.—Remedies for Boils.

There are boils also, known as “furunculi,” [“Little thieves,” literally.] which make their appearance indiscriminately on all parts of the body, and are productive of the greatest inconvenience: sometimes indeed, when the constitution is exhausted, they are fatal in their effects. For their cure, leaves of pycnocomon [See c. 36 of this Book.] are employed, beaten up with polenta, [See B. xviii. c. 14.] if the boil has not come to a head. They are dispersed also by an application of leaves of ephedron. [See c. 83 of this Book.]

### Chap. 78.—Remedies for Fistula.

Fistulas, too, insidiously attack all parts of the body, owing to unskilfulness on the part of medical men in the use of the knife. The smaller centaury [See B. xxv. c. 31.] is used for their cure, with the addition of lotions [“Collyriis.”] and boiled honey: juice of plantago [See B. xxv. c. 39.] is also employed, as an injection; cinquefoil, mixed with salt and honey; ladanum, [See B. xii. c. 37, and c. 30 this Book.] combined with castoreum; [See B. viii. c. 47.] cotyledon, [See B. xxv. c. 101.] applied hot with stag’s marrow; pith of the root of verbascum [See B. xxv. c. 73.] reduced to a liquid state in the shape of a lotion, and injected; root of aristolochia; [See B. xxv. c. 54.] or juice of tithymalos. [See c. 39 of this Book.]

### Chap. 79.—Remedies for Abscesses and Hard Tumours.

Abscesses and inflammations are cured by an application of leaves of argemonia. [See B. xxv. c. 56.] For indurations and gatherings of all descriptions a decoction of vervain or cinquefoil in vinegar is used; leaves or root of verbascum; [See B. xxv. c. 73.] a liniment made of wine and hyssop; root of acoron, [See B. xxv. c. 100.] a decoction of it being used as a fomentation; or else aizoüm. [See B. xxv. c. 102.] Contusions also, hard tumours, and fistulous abscesses are treated with, illecebra. [See B. xxv. c. 103.]

All kinds of foreign substances which have pierced the flesh are extracted by using leaves of tussilago, [See B. xxiv. c. 85.] daueus, [See B. xxv. c. 64.] or seed of leontopodium [See B. xxvii, c. 72.] pounded in water with polenta. [See B. xviii. c. 14.] To suppurations, leaves of pycnocomon [See Chapters 36 and 77 of this Book.] are applied, beaten up with polenta, or else the seed of that plant, or orchis. [See c. 62 of this Book.] An application of root of satyrion [See c. 62 of this Book.] is said to be a most efficacious remedy for deep-seated diseases of the bones. Corrosive ulcers and all kinds of gatherings are treated with sea-weed, [See c. 66 of this Book.] used before it has dried. Root, too, of alcima [Probably the “Alcea” of B. xxvii. c. 6. See also B. xxv. c. 77.] disperses gatherings.

### Chap. 80.—Remedies Fob Burns.

Burns are cured by the agency of plantago, [See B. xxv. c. 39.] or of arction, [See B. xxvii, c. 16.] so effectually indeed as to leave no scar. The leaves of this last plant are boiled in water, beaten up, and applied to the sore. Boots of cyclaminos [See B. xxv. c. 67.] are used, in combination with aizoüm; [See B. xxv. c. 102.] the kind of hypericon also, which we have mentioned as being called “corissum.” [Or “Corison.” See c. 53 of this Book.]

### Chap. 81. Remedies for Diseases of the Sinews and Joints.

For diseases of the sinews and joints, plantago, [See B. xxv. e. 39.] beaten up with salt, is a very useful remedy, or else argemonia, [See B. xxv. c. 56.] pounded with honey. Patients affected with spasms or tetanus are rubbed with juice of peucedanum. [See B. xxv. c. 70.] For indurations of the sinews, juice of ægilops [See B. xxv. c. 93.] is employed, and for pains in those parts of the body erigeron [See B. xxv. c. 106.] or epithymum, [See c. 35 of this Book.] used as a liniment, with vinegar. In cases of spasms and opisthotony, it is an excellent plan to rub the part affected with seed of the hypericon known as “caros,” [See c. 53 of this Book.] and to take the seed in drink. Phrynion, [See B. xxv. c. 76.] it is said, will effect a cure even when the sinews have been severed, if applied instantaneously, bruised or chewed. For spasmodic affections, fits of trembling, and opisthotony, root of alcima [See Note 1462 above.] is administered in hydromel; used in this manner, if has a warming effect when the limbs are benumbed with cold.

### Chap. 82.—Remedies for Hæmorrhage.

The red seed of the plant called “pæonia” [Our peony. See B. xxv. c. 10.] arrests hæmorrhage; the root also is possessed of similar properties. But it is clymenus [See B. xxv. c. 33.] that should be employed, when there are discharges of blood at the mouth or nostrils, from the bowels, or from the uterus. In such cases, lysimachia [See B. xxv. c. 35.] also is taken in drink, applied topically, or introduced into the nostrils; or else seed of plantago, [See B. xxv. c. 39.] or cinquefoil, is taken in drink, or employed in the form of a liniment. Hemlock seed is introduced into the nostrils, for discharges of blood there, or else it is pounded and applied in water; aizoüm. [See B. xxv. c. 102.] also, and root of astragalus. [See c. 29 of the present Book.] Ischæmon [See B. xxv. c. 45.] and achillea [See B. xxv. c. 19.] likewise arrest hæmorrhage.
