---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 26-30."
chapter_order: 24
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 26. (22.)—Dalmatia.

Scardona, situate upon the river [The Titus or Kerka. Scardona still retains its name.], at a distance of twelve miles from the sea, forms the boundary of Liburnia and the beginning of Dalmatia. Next to this place comes the ancient country of the Autariatares and the fortress of Tariona, the Promontory of Diomedes [Now called the Cabo di San Nicolo.], or, as others call it, the peninsula of Hyllis, 100 miles [This measurement would make it appear that the present Sabioncello is meant, but that it ought to come below, after Narona. He probably means the quasi peninsula upon which the town of Tragurium, now Trau Vecchio, was situate; but its circumference is hardly fifty miles. So, if Sicum is the same as the modern Sebenico, it ought to have been mentioned previously to Tragurium.] in circuit. Then comes Tragurium, a place with the rights of Roman citizens, and celebrated for its marble, Sicum, a place to which Claudius, the emperor lately deified, sent a colony of his veterans, and Salona [Spalatro, the retreat of Diocletian, was in the vicinity of Salona. Its ancient name was Spolatum, and at the village of Dioclea near it, that emperor was born. On the ruins of the once important city of Salona, rose the modern Spalato or Spalatro.], a colony, situate 112 miles from Iadera. To this place resort for legal purposes, having the laws dispensed according to their divisions into decuries or tithings, the Dalmatæ, forming 342 decuries, the Deurici 22, the Ditiones 239, the Mazæi 269, and the Sardiates 52. In this region are Burnum [Its site is unknown, though D’Anville thinks that it was probably that of the modern Tain.], Andetrium [Clissa is supposed to occupy its site. Tribulium is probably the modern Ugliane.], and Tribulium, fortresses ennobled by the battles of the Roman people. To the same jurisdiction also belong the Issæi [The people of the island of Issa, now Lissa, off the coast of Liburnia. It was originally peopled by a Parian or a Syracusan colony. It was famous for its wine, and the beaked ships “Lembi Issaici,” rendered the Romans good service in the war with Philip of Macedon.], the Colentini, the Separi, and the Epetini, nations inhabiting the islands. After these come the fortresses of Peguntium [The modern Almissa stands on its site; and on that of Rataneum, Mucarisca.] and of Rataneum, with the colony of Narona [Now called Narenta; the river having the same name.], the seat of the third jurisdiction, distant from Salona eighty-two miles, and situate upon a river of the same name, at a distance of twenty miles from the sea. M. Varro states that eighty-nine states used to resort thither, but now nearly the only ones that are known are the Cerauni [The localities of all these peoples are unknown.] with 24 decuries, the Daorizi with 17, the Dæsitiates with 103, the Docleatæ with 33, the Deretini with 14, the Deremistæ with 30, the Dindari with 33, the Glinditiones with 44, the Melcomani with 24, the Naresii with 102, the Scirtarii with 72, the Siculotæ with 24, and the Vardæi, once the scourges of Italy, with no more than 20 decuries. In addition to these, this district was possessed by the Ozuæi, the Partheni, the Hemasini, the Arthitæ, and the Armistæ. The colony of Epidaurum [Or Epidaurus. It is not noticed in history till the civil war between Pompey and Cæsar, when, having declared in favour of the latter, it was besieged by M. Octavius. The site of it is known as Ragusa Vecchia, or Old Ragusa, but in the Illyric language it is called Zaptal. Upon its destruction, its inhabitants moved to Rausium, the present Ragusa. There are no remains extant of the old town.] is distant from the river Naron 100 miles. After Epidaurum come the following towns, with the rights of Roman citizens:—Rhizinium [It still retains the name of Risine, upon the Golfo di Cattaro, the ancient Sinus Rhizonicus.], Acruvium [In the former editions called “Ascrivium.” The modern Cattaro is supposed to occupy its site. Butua is the modern Budua, and Olcinium, Dulcigno. It is probable that the derivation of the name of this last place, as suggested by Pliny, is only fanciful.], Butua, Olcinium, formerly called Colchinium, having been founded by the Colchians; the river Drilo [Now called Drin and Drino.], and, upon it, Scodra [Now called Scutari or Scodar, the capital of the province called by the Turks Sangiac de Scodar.], a town with the rights of Roman citizens, situate at a distance of eighteen miles from the sea; besides in former times many Greek towns and once powerful states, of which all remembrance is fast fading away. For in this region there were formerly the Labeatæ, the Enderini [According to Hardouin, the modern Endero stands on the site of their capital.], the Sasæi, the Grabæi [Grabia, mentioned by Pouqueville, in his “Voyage de la Grèce,” seems to retain the name of this tribe.], properly called Illyrii, the Taulantii [Pouqueville is of opinion that they occupied the district now known as Musaché.], and the Pyræi. The Promontory of Nymphæum on the sea-coast still retains its name [Dalechamp thinks that the two words “Retinet nomen” do not belong to the text, but have crept in from being the gloss of some more recent commentator. They certainly appear to be out of place. This promontory is now called Cabo Rodoni.]; and there is Lissum, a town enjoying the rights of Roman citizens, at a distance from Epidaurum of 100 miles.

(23.) At Lissum begins the province of Macedonia [The modern Albania.], the nations of the Parthini [Pouqueville is of opinion that they inhabited the district about the present village of Presa, seven leagues N.E. of Durazzo.], and behind them the Dassaretæ [From Ptolemy we learn that Lychnidus was their town; the site of which, according to Pouqueville, is still pointed out at a spot about four leagues south of Ochrida, on the eastern bank of the Lake of Ochrida.]. The mountains of Candavia [Now called El Bassan; though Pouqueville says Tomoros or De Caulonias. Commencing in Epirus, they separated Illyricum from Macedonia. See Lucan’s Pharsalia, B. vi. l. 331.] are seventy-eight miles from Dyrrhachium. On the coast lies Denda, a town with the rights of Roman citizens, the colony of Epidamnum [The Romans are said to have changed its Greek name Epidamnum, from an idea that it was inauspicious, as implying “damnum” or “ruin.” It has been asserted that they gave it the name of Durrhachium or Dyrrhachium, from “durum,” rugged, on account of the ruggedness of its locality. This however cannot be the case, as the word, like its predecessor, is of Greek origin. Its unfortunate name, “Epidamnus,” is the subject of several puns and witticisms in that most amusing perhaps of all the plays of Plautus, the Menæchmi. It was of Corcyræan origin, and after playing a distinguished part in the civil wars between Pompey and Cæsar, was granted by Augustus to his veteran troops. The modern Durazzo stands on its site.], which, on account of its inauspicious name, was by the Romans called Dyrrhachium, the river Aöus [Now called the Voioussa.], by some called Æas, and Apollonia [The monastery of Pollina stands on its site. It was founded by the Corinthians and Corcyræans. There are scarcely any vestiges of it remaining.], formerly a colony of the Corinthians, at a distance of four miles from the sea, in the vicinity of which the celebrated Nymphæum [See further mention of this spot in B. ii. c..] is inhabited by the barbarous Amantes [Pouqueville states that the ruins of Amantia are to be seen near the village of Nivitza, on the right bank of the river Suchista. The remains of Bullis, the chief town of the Buliones, according to the same traveller, are to be seen at a place called Gradista, four miles from the sea.] and Buliones. Upon the coast too is the town of Oricum [The same writer states that Oricum was situate on the present Gulf De la Vallona or d’Avlona, and that its port was the place now called by the Greeks Porto Raguseo, and by the Turks Liman Padisha.], founded by the Colchians. At this spot begins Epirus, with the Acroceraunian [The “Heights of Thunder.” They were so called from the frequent thunderstorms with which they were visited. The range however was more properly called the “Ceraunii Montes,” and the promontory terminating it “Acroceraunii” or “Acroceraunia,” meaning “the end of the Ceraunii.” The range is now called the Mountains of Khimara, and the promontory, Glossa, or in Italian, Linguetta, meaning “the Tongue.”] mountains, by which we have previously mentioned [In C. of the present Book.] this Gulf of Europe as bounded. Oricum is distant from the Promontory of Salentinum in Italy eighty [About 70 English miles is the distance.] miles.

### Chap. 27. (24.)—The Norici.

In the rear of the Carni and the Iapydes, along the course of the great river Ister [The Donau or Danube.], the Rhæti touch upon the Norici [Noricum corresponded to the greater part of the present Styria and Carinthia, and a part of Austria, Bavaria, and Salzburg.]: their towns are Virunum [According to D’Anville the modern Wolk-Markt, on the river Drau or Drave. Celeia is the modern Cilley in Carniola. Teurnia, according to Mannert, is the Lurnfelde, near the small town of Spital.], Celeia, Teurnia, Aguntum [According to Mannert it was situate near the modern town of Innichen, near the sources of the Drave.], Vianiomina [Supposed to be the same as the Vindobona or Vindomona of other authors, standing on the site of the modern city of Vienna.], Claudia [According to Cluver, it stood on the site of the modern Clausen in Bavaria.], and Flavium Solvense [Mannert says that this place was the same with the modern Solfeld, near Klagenfurt.]. Adjoining to the Norici is Lake Peiso [D’Anville and other writers think that this is the Neusiedler See, not far from Vienna. Mannert, however, is of opinion that the name ought to be written Pelso, and that the modern Balaton or Platten See is meant.], and the deserts of the Boii [The mountainous and woody tract in the vicinity of the Lake Balaton, on the confines of ancient Noricum and Pannonia.]; they are however now inhabited by the people of Sabaria [Now Sarvar on the river Raab, on the confines of Austria and Hungary.], a colony of the now deified emperor Claudius, and the town of Scarabantia Julia [According to Hardouin, the modern Sopron or Œdenburg.].

### Chap. 28. (25.)—Pannonia.

Next to them comes acorn-bearing Pannonia [This province corresponded to the eastern part of Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, the whole of Hungary between the Danube and Saave, Slavonia, and part of Croatia and Bosnia. It was reduced by Tiberius, acting under the orders of Augustus.], along which the chain of the Alps, gradually lessening as it runs through the middle of Illyricum from north to south, forms a gentle slope on the right hand and the left. The portion which looks towards the Adriatic Sea is called Dalmatia and Illyricum, above mentioned, while Pannonia stretches away towards the north, and has the Danube for its extreme boundary. In it are the colonies of Æmona [Now Laybach, previously mentioned in c.. Sissia has been succeeded by the modern Sissek on the Saave.] and Siscia. The following rivers, both known to fame and adapted for commerce, flow into the Danube; the Draus [The modern Draave or Drau.], which rushes from Noricum with great impetuosity, and the Savus [Now the Sau or Saave.], which flows with a more gentle current from the Carnic Alps, there being a space between them of 120 miles. The Draus runs through the Serretes, the Serrapilli [According to Hardouin the Serretes and the Serrapilli inhabited the modern Carinthia on both sides of the Draave. The sites of the other nations here mentioned are unknown.], the Iasi, and the Andizetes; the Savus through the Colapiani [So called from the river Colapis. The other tribes are unknown.] and the Breuci; these are the principal peoples. Besides them there are the Arivates, the Azali, the Amantini, the Belgites, the Catari, the Cornacates, the Eravisci, the Hercuniates [Probably the same as the mountain range near Warasdin on the Draave. The nations mentioned here dwelt on the western and eastern slopes of this range.], the Latovici, the Oseriates, the Varciani, and, in front of Mount Claudius, the Scordisci, behind it the Taurisci. In the Savus there is the island of Metubarris [Now known as Zagrabia.], the greatest of all the islands formed by rivers. Besides the above, there are these other rivers worthy of mention:—the Colapis [Now the Culpa.], which flows into the Savus near Siscia, where, dividing its channel, it forms the island which is called Segestica [Dion Cassius, B. xix., says that the river Colapis or Colops flowed past the walls of the town of Siscia, but that Tiberius Cæsar caused a trench to be dug round the town, and so drew the river round it, leading it back on the other side into its channel. He calls the island Segetica.]; and the river Bacuntius [Now the Bossut. Sirmium occupied the site of the present Sirmich.], which flows into the Savus at the town of Sirmium, where we find the state of the Sirmienses and the Amantini. Forty-five miles thence is Taurunum [The modern Tzeruinka, according to D’Anville and Brotier.], where the Savus flows into the Danube; above which spot the Valdanus [Now the Walpo and the Sarroiez, according to Hardouin; or the Bosna and the Verbas, according to Brotier and Mannert.] and the Urpanus, themselves far from ignoble rivers, join that stream.

### Chap. 29. (26.)—Mœsia.

Joining up to Pannonia is the province called Mœsia [Corresponding to the present Servia and Bulgaria.], which runs, with the course of the Danube, as far as the Euxine. It commences at the confluence [Of the Danube with the Saave or Savus just mentioned.] previously mentioned. In it are the Dardani, the Celegeri, the Triballi, the Timachi, the Mœsi, the Thracians, and the Scythians who border on the Euxine. The more famous among its rivers are the Margis [Now the Morava, which runs through Servia into the Danube. The Pingus is probably the Bek, which joins the Danube near Gradistic. The Timachus is the modern Timoch, and the Œscus is the Iscar in Bulgaria.], which rises in the territory of the Dardani, the Pingus, the Timachus, the Œscus which rises in Mount Rhodope, and, rising in Mount Hæmus, the Utus [Now called the Vid, the Osma, and the Jantra, rising in the Balkan chain.], the Asamus, and the Ieterus.

The breadth of Illyricum [Ajasson remarks here that the name of Illyricum was very vaguely used by the ancients, and that at different periods, different countries were so designated. In Pliny’s time that region comprised the country between the Arsia and the mouth of the Drilo, bounding it on the side of Macedonia. It would thus comprehend a part of modern Carniola, with part of Croatia, Bosnia, Dalmatia, and Upper Albania. In later times this name was extended to Noricum, Pannonia, Mœsia, Dacia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia, Epirus, and even the Isle of Crete.] at its widest part is 325 miles, and its length from the river Arsia to the river Drinius 530; from the Drinius to the Promontory of Acroceraunia Agrippa states to be 175 miles, and he says that the entire circuit of the Italian and Illyrian Gulf is 1700 miles. In this Gulf, according to the limits which we have drawn, are two seas, the Ionian [Here meaning that part of the Mediterranean which lies between Italy and Greece south of the Adriatic. In more ancient times the Adriatic was included in the Ionian Sea, which was probably so called from the Ionian colonies which settled in Cephallenia and the other islands on the western coast of Greece.] in the first part, and the Adriatic, which runs more inland and is called the Upper Sea.

### Chap. 30.—Islands of the Ionian Sea and the Adriatic.

In the Ausonian Sea there are no islands worthy of notice beyond those which we have already mentioned, and only a few in the Ionian; those, for instance, upon the Calabrian coast, opposite Brundusium, by the projection of which a harbour is formed; and, over against the Apulian coast, Diomedia [More properly “Diomedeæ,” being a group of small islands off the coast of Apulia now called Isole di Tremiti, about eighteen miles from the mouth of the Fortore. They were so called from the fable that here the companions of Diomedes were changed into birds. A species of sea-fowl (which Pliny mentions in B. x. c. 44) were said to be the descendants of these Greek sailors, and to show a great partiality for such persons as were of kindred extraction. See Ovid’s Metamorphoses, B. xiv. l. 500. The real number of these islands was a matter of dispute with the ancients, but it seems that there are but three, and some mere rocks. The largest of the group is the island of San Domenico, and the others are San Nicola and Caprara. The small island of Pianosa, eleven miles N.E., is not considered one of the group, but is not improbably the Teutria of Pliny. San Domenico was the place of banishment of Julia, the licentious daughter of Augustus.], remarkable for the monument of Diomedes, and another island called by the same name, but by some Teutria.

The coast of Illyricum is clustered with more than 1000 islands, the sea being of a shoaly nature, and numerous creeks and æstuaries running with their narrow channels between portions of the land. The more famous are those before the mouths of the Timavus, with warm springs [Now called the Bagni di Monte Falcone. See B. ii. c..] that rise with the tides of the sea, the island of Cissa near the territory of the Istri, and the Pullaria [Now called Cherso and Osero, off the Illyrian coast. Ptolemy mentions only one, Apsorrus, on which he places a town of that name and another called Crepsa. The Pullaria are now called Li Brioni, in the Sinus Flanaticus, opposite the city of Pola.] and Absyrtides [See p. 258.], so called by the Greeks from the circumstance of Absyrtus, the brother of Medea, having been slain there. Some islands near them have been called the Electrides [In B. xxxvii. c. 11, he again mentions this circumstance, and states that some writers have placed them in the Adriatic opposite the mouths of the Padus. Scymnus of Chios makes mention of them in conjunction with the Absyrtides. This confusion probably arose from the fact previously noted that the more ancient writers had a confused idea that the Ister communicated with the Adriatic, at the same time mistaking it probably for the Vistula, which flows into the Baltic. At the mouth of this last-mentioned river, there were Electrides or “amber-bearing” islands.], upon which amber, which they call “electrum,” was said to be found; a most assured instance however of that untruthfulness [“Vanitatis.”] which is generally ascribed to the Greeks, seeing that it has never yet been ascertained which of the islands were meant by them under that name. Opposite to the Iader is Lissa, and other islands whose names have been already mentioned [Crexa, Grissa, and Colentum, in c..]. Opposite to the Liburni are some islands called the Crateæ, and no smaller number styled Liburnicæ and Celadussæ [According to Brotier, these are situate between the islands of Zuri and Sebenico, and are now called Kasvan, Capri, Smolan, Tihat, Sestre, Parvich, Zlarin, &c. Some writers however suggest that there were no islands called Celadussæ, and that the name in Pliny is a corruption of Dyscelados in Pomponius Mela; which in its turn is supposed to have been invented from what was really an epithet of Issa, in a line of Apollonius Rhodius, B. iv. l. 565. Ἰσσά τε δυσκέλαδος, “and inauspicious Issa.” See Brunck’s remarks on the passage.]. Opposite to Surium is Bavo, and Brattia [Now Brazza. According to Brotier the island is still celebrated for the delicate flavour of the flesh of its goats and lambs. Issa is now called Lissa, and Pharia is the modern Lesina. Baro, now Bua, lies off the coast of Dalmatia, and was used as a place of banishment under the emperors.], famous for its goats, Issa with the rights of Roman citizens, and Pharia with a town. At a distance of twenty-five miles from Issa is Corcyra [Now Curzola, or, in the Sclavonic, Karkar. It obtained its name of Nigra or Melæna, “black,” from the dark colour of its pine woods. Sir G. Wilkinson describes it in his “Dalmatia and Montenegro,” vol. i.], surnamed Melæna, with a town founded by the Cnidians; between which and Illyricum is Melite [Now called Meleda or Zapuntello. It is more generally to the other island of Melita or Malta that the origin of the “Melitæi” or Maltese dogs is ascribed. Some writers are of opinion that it was upon this island that St. Paul was shipwrecked, and not the larger Melita.], from which, as we learn from Callimachus, a certain kind of little dogs were called Melitæi; fifteen miles from it we find the seven Elaphites [So called from their resemblance to a stag, ἔλαφος, of which the modern Giupan formed the head, Ruda the neck, Mezzo the body, Calamotta the haunches, and the rock of Grebini or Pettini the tail. They produce excellent wine and oil, and are looked upon as the most valuable part of the Ragusan territory.]. In the Ionian Sea, at a distance of twelve miles from Oricum, is Sasonis [Still known as Sasino. It is ten miles from Ragusa, the port of Oricum, according to Pouqueville.], notorious from having been a harbour of pirates.

Summary. —The towns and nations mentioned are in number \* \* \* \* [The original numbers are lost.]. The rivers of note are in number \* \* \* \*. The mountains of note are in number \* \* \* \*. The islands are in number \* \* \* \*. The towns or nations which have disappeared are in number \* \* \* \*. The facts, statements, and observations are in number 326.

Roman Authors quoted. —Turannius Gracilis [He was a Spaniard by birth, a native of Mellaria in Hispania Bætica. He is mentioned by Cicero as a man of great learning, and is probably the same person that is mentioned by Ovid in his Pontic Epistles, B. iv. ep. xvi. l. 29, as a distinguished tragic writer.], Cornelius Nepos [See end of], T. Livius [See end of], Cato the Censor [M. Porcius Cato, or Cato the Elder; famous as a statesman, a patriot, and a philosopher. He wrote “De Re Rustica,” a work which still survives, and “Letters of Instruction to his Son,” of which only some fragments remain. He also wrote a historical work called “Origines,” of which Pliny makes considerable use. Of this also only a few fragments are left. His life has been written by Cornelius Nepos, Plutarch, and Aurelius Victor.], M. Agrippa [M. Vipsanius Agrippa, the distinguished partisan of Augustus, to whose niece Marcella he was married, but he afterwards divorced her for Julia, the daughter of Augustus by Scribonia, and the widow of Marcellus. He distinguished himself in Gaul, at Actium, and in Illyria. He constructed many public works at Rome, and among them the Pantheon; he also built the splendid aqueduct at Nismes. He died suddenly in his 51st year. His body was buried in the Mausoleum of Augustus, who pronounced his funeral oration. He wrote memoirs of his own life. Pliny often refers to the “Commentarii” of Agrippa, by which are meant, it is supposed, certain official lists drawn up by him in the measurement of the Roman world under Augustus. His map of the world is also mentioned by Pliny in c. of the present Book.], M. Varro [See end of], the Emperor Augustus [From Servius, Suetonius and Plutarch we learn that Augustus wrote Memoirs of his Life, in thirteen books; from Suetonius, that he composed a Summary of the Empire (which was probably that referred to in the above note on Agrippa); and from Quintilian, Aulus Gellius, and Pliny, B. xviii. c. 38, that he published Letters written to his grandson Caius.] now deified, Varro Atacinus [P. Terentius Varro, surnamed Atacinus, from the Atax, a river of Gallia Narbonensis, in which province he was born, B.C. 82. Of his “Argonautica,” his “Cosmographia” (probably the same with his “Iter”), his “Navales Libri,” and his Heroic and Amatory Poems, only a few fragments now exist. Of his life nothing whatever is known.], Antias [Valerias Antias. See end of], Hyginus [C. Julius Hyginus, a native of Spain, and freedman of Augustus, by whom he was placed at the Palatine Library. He lived upon terms of intimacy with Ovid. He wrote works on the sites of the cities of Italy, the Nature of the Gods, an account of the Penates, an account of Virgil (probably the same as the work called “Commentaries on Virgil”), on the Families of Trojan descent, on Agriculture, the “Propempticon Cinnæ,” the Lives of Illustrious Men (quoted by John of Salisbury in his “Polycraticon”), a book of Examples, and a work on the Art of War, also mentioned by John of Salisbury. A book of Fables, and an Astronomical Poem, in four books, are ascribed to him, but they are probably productions of a later age.], L. Vetus [L. Antistius Vetus, Consul with Nero, A.D. 55. While commanding in Germany he formed the project of connecting the Moselle and the Saone by a canal, thus establishing a communication between the Mediterranean and the Northern Ocean. Nero having resolved on his death, he anticipated his sentence by opening his veins in a warm bath. His mother-in-law Sextia, and his daughter Pollentia, in a similar manner perished with him.], Pomponius Mela [He was born, it is supposed, at Tingentera, or Cingentera, on the bay of Algesiras, and probably flourished in the reign of Claudius. He was the first Roman author who wrote a treatise on Geography. It is still extant, and bears marks of great care, while it is written in pure and unaffected language.], Curio [C. Scribonius Curio, the third known of that name. He was the first Roman general who advanced as far as the Danube. Like his son of the same name, he was a violent opponent of Julius Cæsar. He was eloquent as an orator, but ignorant and uncultivated. His orations were published, as also an invective against Cæsar, in form of a dialogue, in which his son was introduced as one of the interlocutors. He died B.C. 53.] the Elder, Cælius [L. Cælius Antipater. See end of], Arruntius [L. Arruntius, Consul, A.D. 6. Augustus declared in his last illness that he was worthy of the empire. This, with his riches and talents, rendered him an object of suspicion to Tiberius. Being charged as an accomplice in the crimes of Albucilla, he put himself to death by opening his veins. It appears not to be certain whether it was this person or his father who wrote a history of the first Punic war, in which he imitated the style of Sallust.], Sebosus [Statius Sebosus. See end of], Licinius Mucianus [Licinius Crassus Mucianus. See end of], Fabricius Tuscus [Of this writer no particulars whatever are known.], L. Ateius [In most editions this name appears as L. Ateius Capito, but Sillig separates them, and with propriety it would appear, as the name of Capito the great legist was not Lucius. Ateius here mentioned was probably the person surnamed Prætextatus, and Philologus, a freedman of the jurist Ateius Capito. For Sallust the historian he composed an Abstract of Roman History, and for Asinius Pollio he compiled precepts on the Art of Writing. His Commentaries were numerous, but a few only were surviving in the time of Suetonius.], Capito [C. Ateius Capito, one of the most famous of the Roman legists, and a zealous partisan of Augustus, who had him elevated to the Consulship A.D. 5. He was the rival of Labeo, the republican jurist. His legal works were very voluminous, and extracts from them are to be found in the Digest. He also wrote a work on the Pontifical Rights and the Law of Sacrifices.], Verrius Flaccus [A distinguished grammarian of the latter part of the first century B.C. He was entrusted by Augustus with the education of his grandsons Caius and Lucius Cæsar. He died at an advanced age in the reign of Tiberius. He wrote upon antiquities, history, and philosophy: among his numerous works a History of the Etruscans is mentioned, also a treatise on Orthography. Pliny quotes him very frequently.], L. Piso [See end of], Gellianus [He is mentioned in c., but nothing more is known of him.], and Valerianus [Nothing is known of him. The younger Pliny addressed three Epistles to a person of this name, B. ii. Ep. 15, B. v. Ep. 4, 14.].

Foreign Authors quoted. —Artemidorus [See end of], Alexander Polyhistor [Also called by Pliny Cornelius Alexander. Suidas states that he was a native of Ephesus and a disciple of Crates, and during the war of Sylla in Greece was made prisoner and sold as a slave to C. Lentulus, who made him the tutor of his children, and afterwards restored him to freedom. Servius however says that he received the franchise from L. Cornelius Sylla. He was burnt with his house at Laurentum. Other writers say that he was a native of Catiæum in Lesser Phrygia. The surname of “Polyhistor” was given to him for his prodigious learning. His greatest work seems to have been a historical and geographical account of the world, in forty-two books. Other works of his are frequently mentioned by Plutarch, Photius, and other writers.], Thucydides [The historian of the Peloponnesian war, and the most famous, perhaps, of all the ancient writers in prose.], Theophrastus [Of Eresus in Lesbos; the favourite disciple of Aristotle, and designated by him as his successor in the presidency of the Lyceum. He composed more than 200 works on various subjects, of which only a very few survive.], Isidorus [See end of], Theopompus [See end of], Metrodorus of Scepsis [He is frequently mentioned by Cicero, and was famous for his eloquence. Pliny informs us in his 34th book, that from his hatred of the Romans he was called the “Roman-hater.” It is probable that he was the writer of a Periegesis, or geographical work, from which Pliny seems to quote.], Callicrates [No particulars of this author are known. He probably wrote on geography.], Xenophon of Lampsacus [He is again mentioned by Pliny in B. iv. c., and B. vi. c. 31, and by Solinus, c. xxii. 60. It is supposed that he was the author of a Periplus or Circumnavigation of the Earth, mentioned by Pliny B. vii. c. 48; but nothing further is known of him.], Diodorus of Syracuse [Diodorus Siculus was a native of Agyra or Agyrium, and not of Syracuse, though he may possibly have resided or studied there. It cannot be doubted that he is the person here meant, and Pliny refers in his preface by name to his Βιβλιοθήκη, “Library,” or Universal History. A great portion of this miscellaneous but valuable work has perished. We have but few particulars of his life; but he is supposed to have written his work after B.C. 8.], Nymphodorus [Of Syracuse; an historian probably of the time of Philip and Alexander. He was the author of a Periplus of Asia, and an account of Sicily and Sardinia. From his stories in the last he obtained the name of “Thaumatographus” or “writer of wonders.”], Calliphanes [Of Calliphanes the Geographer nothing is known.], and Timagenes [Probably Timagenes, the rhetorician of Alexandria. He was taken prisoner and brought to Rome, but redeemed from captivity by Faustus, the son of Sylla. He wrote many works, but it is somewhat doubtful whether the “Periplus,” in five Books, was written by this Timagenes. He is also supposed to have written a work on the Antiquities of Gaul.].
