---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 50-70."
chapter_order: 242
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 50.—Other Stones Used for Building.

When the nature of stone is doubtful, the proper precaution is, to quarry it in summer, and not to use it for building before the end of a couple of years, leaving it in the meantime to be well seasoned by the weather. The slabs which have been damaged will be found to be better suited for the foundations under ground: while those, on the other hand, which have remained uninjured, may be employed with safety, and exposed to the open air even.

### Chap. 51.—The Various Methods of Building.

The Greeks construct party-walls, resembling those of brickwork, of hard stone or of silex, squared. This kind of stonework is what they call “isodomon,” [“Built of stones of equal size.”] it being ” pseudisodomon” [“Built of stones of unequal sizes.”] when the wall is built of materials of unequal dimensions. A third kind of stonework is called “emplecton,” [“Filled up work,” apparently.] the two exteriors only being made with regularity, the rest of the material being thrown in at random. It is necessary that the stones should lie over one another alternately, in such a way that the middle of one stone meets the point of junction of the two below it; and this, too, in the middle of the wall, if possible; but if not, at all events, at the sides. When the middle of the wall is filled up with broken stones, the work is known as “diatoichon.” [The reading is very doubtful here: for the word seems to mean, in Greek, “From one wall to another.” “Diamicton”—“Mixed up,” is another reading.]

The reticulated [Where the outer face of each stone forms an exact square; the pointings consequently having a netlike or reticulated appearance.] kind of building, which is mostly in use at Rome, is very liable to crack. [The vertical pointings or junctures lying one over the other.] All building should be done by line and rule, and ought to be strictly on the perpendicular.

### Chap. 52. (23.)—Cisterns.

Cisterns should be made of five parts of pure, gravelly, sand, two of the very strongest quicklime, and fragments of silex not exceeding a pound each in weight; when thus incorporated, the bottom and sides should be well beaten with iron rammers. The best plan, too, is to have the cisterns double; so that all superfluities may settle in the inner cistern, and the water filter through, as pure as possible, into the outer one.

### Chap. 53.—Quick-Lime.

Cato [De Re Rust. c. 38.] the Censor disapproves of lime prepared from stones of various colours: that made of white stone is the best. Lime prepared from hard stone is the best for building purposes, and that from porous stone for coats of plaster. For both these purposes, lime made from silex is equally rejected. Stone that has been extracted from quarries furnishes a better lime than that collected from the beds of rivers; but the best of all is the lime that is obtained from the molar-stone, [See Chapters and of this Book.] that being of a more unctuous nature than the others. It is something truly marvellous, that quick-lime, after the stone has been subjected to fire, should ignite on the application of water!

### Chap. 54.—The Various Kinds of Sand. The Combinations of Sand with Lime.

There are three kinds of sand: fossil [To which Pozzuolane belongs.] sand, to which one-fourth part of lime should be added; [For making mortar.] river sand; and sea sand; to both of which last, one third of lime should be added. If, too, one third of the mortar is composed of bruised earthenware, it will be all the better. Fossil sand is found in the districts that lie between the Apennines and the Padus, but not in the parts beyond sea.

### Chap. 55.—Defects in Building. Plasters for Walls.

The great cause of the fall of so many buildings in our City, is, that through a fraudulent abstraction of the lime, the rough work is laid without anything to hold it together. The older, too, the mortar is, the better it is in quality. In the ancient laws for the regulation of building, no contractor was to use mortar less than three months old; hence it is, that no cracks have disfigured the plaster coatings of their walls. These stuccos will never present a sufficiently bright surface, unless there have been three layers of sanded mortar, and two of marbled [Pounded marble mixed with quicklime.] mortar upon that. In damp localities and places subject to exhalations from the sea, it is the best plan to substitute ground earthenware mortar for sanded mortar. In Greece, it is the practice, first to pound the lime and sand used for plastering, with wooden pestles in a large trough. The test by which it is known that marbled mortar has been properly blended, is its not adhering to the trowel; whereas, if it is only wanted for white-washing, the lime, after being well slaked with water, should stick like glue. For this last purpose, however, the lime should only be slaked in lumps.

At Elis, there is a Temple of Minerva, which was pargetted, they say, by Panænus, the brother of Phidias, with a mortar that was blended with milk and saffron: [“Lacte et croco” appears to be a preferable reading to “late e croco,” as given by the Bamberg MS.] hence it is, that, even at the present day, when rubbed with spittle on the finger, it yields the smell and flavour of saffron.

### Chap. 56.—Columns. The Several Kinds of Columns.

The more closely columns are placed together, the thicker they appear to be. There are four different kinds of pillars. Those of which the diameter at the foot is one-sixth part of the height, are called Doric. When the diameter is one-ninth, they are Ionic; and when it is one-seventh, Tuscan. The proportions in the Corinthian are the same as those of the Ionic; but they differ in the circumstance that the Corinthian capitals are of the same height as the diameter at the foot, a thing that gives them a more slender appearance; whereas, in the Ionic column, the height of the capital is only one-third of the diameter at the foot. In ancient times the rule was, that the columns should be one-third of the breadth of the temple in height.

It was in the Temple of Diana, at Ephesus, as originally built, that spirals [It seems difficult to understand whether by the word “spiræ” he means astragals, or bases. It would almost appear, by the use of the word “subditæ,” that it is “bases” for the shafts. It is just possible, however, that the meaning may be that the “spiræ” were placed beneath the capitals which were added.] were first placed beneath, and capitals added: and it was determined that the diameter of the shafts should be one-eighth of their height, and that the spirals should be one-half of the diameter in height, the upper extremity of the shaft being one-seventh less in diameter than the foot. In addition to these columns, there are what are called “Attic” columns, quadrangular, and with equal sides.

### Chap. 57. (24.)—Five Remedies Derived from Lime.

Lime is also employed very extensively in medicine. For this purpose, fresh lime is selected, which has not been slaked with water. Its properties are caustic, resolvent, and attractive; and it prevents serpiginous ulcers from spreading, being incorporated with vinegar and oil of roses, for the purpose. When this has been effected, it is tempered with wax and oil of roses, and applied to promote cicatrization. In combination with honey, and liquid resin, or hogs’ lard, lime is curative of sprains and scrofulous sores.

### Chap. 58.—Maltha.

Maltha [A different thing altogether from the Maltha or Pissasphalt of B. ii. c. 108. Festus describes it as a mixture of pitch and wax; and Palladius, in B. i. c. 17, speaks of it as being composed of tar, grease, and lime boiled; and in c. 35 he describes Maltha caldaria as a mixture of hammoniacum, figs, tow, tar, and melted suet. It was probably a general name for several kinds of cement. Heineccius says that it was employed for sealing, but on what authority does not appear. See Beckmann, Hist. Inv. Vol. I. p. 141. Bohn’s Edition.] is a cement prepared from fresh lime; lumps of which are quenched in wine, and then pounded with hogs’ lard and figs, both of them, mollifying substances. [This is perhaps the meaning of “duplici lenimento.” The reading, however, is doubtful.] It is the most tenacious of all cements, and surpasses stone in hardness. Before applying the maltha, the substance upon which it is used must be well rubbed with oil.

### Chap. 59.—Gypsum.

Gypsum [The name now given to Sulphate of lime, including the varieties of Alabaster and Selenite. Plaster of Paris is prepared from it.] has a close affinity with limestone, and there are numerous varieties of it. One kind is prepared from a calcined [The method of preparing plaster of Paris.] stone, as in Syria, and at Thurii, for example. In Cyprus and at Perrhæbia, [See B. iv. c. 3.] gypsum is dug out of the earth, and at Tymphæa [See B. iv. c. 3.] it is found just below the level of the soil. The stone that is calcined for this purpose, ought to be very similar to alabastrites, [The same thing, strictly speaking. See Chapter of this Book.] or else of a grain like that of marble. In Syria, they select the hardest stones for the purpose, and calcine them with cow-dung, to accelerate the process. Experience has proved, however, that the best plaster of all is that prepared from specular-stone, [See Chapter of this Book.] or any other stone that is similarly laminated. Gypsum, when moistened, must be used immediately, as it hardens with the greatest rapidity; it admits, however, of being triturated over again, and so reduced to powder. It is very useful for pargetting, and has a pleasing effect when used for ornamental figures and wreaths in buildings.

There is one remarkable fact connected with this substance; Caius Proculeius, [See B. vii. c. 46.] an intimate friend of the Emperor Augustus, suffering from violent pains in the stomach, swallowed gypsum, and so put an end to his existence. [Dioscorides says, B. v. c. 134, that, taken internally, it produces suffocation.]

### Chap. 60. (25.)—Pavements. The Asarotos Œcos.

Pavements are an invention of the Greeks, who also practised the art of painting them, till they were superseded by mosaics. [“Lithostrota.”] In this last branch of art, the highest excellence has been attained by Sosus, [His age and country are unknown.] who laid, at Pergamus, the mosaic pavement known as the “Asarotos œcos;” [“The house that has no sweeping.”] from the fact that he there represented, in small squares of different colours, the remnants of a banquet lying upon the pavement, and other things which are usually swept away with the broom, they having all the appearance of being left there by accident. There is a dove also, greatly admired, in the act of drinking, and throwing the shadow of its head upon the water; while other birds are to be seen sunning and pluming themselves, on the margin of a drinking-bowl.

### Chap. 61.—The First Pavements in Use at Rome.

The first pavements, in my opinion, were those now known to us as barbaric and subtegulan [“Subtegulanea.”—“Undercover;” in contradistinction to the “subdialia” of next Chapter.] pavements, a kind of work that was beaten down with the rammer: at least if we may form a judgment from the name [“Pavimentum,” from “pavio,” to “beat down.”] that has been given to them. The first diamonded [“Scutulatum.”—Having figures in the shape of a lozenge or rhombus.] pavement at Rome was laid in the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, after the commencement of the Third Punic War. That pavements had come into common use before the Cimbric War, and that a taste for them was very prevalent, is evident from the line of Lucilius—

“With checquered emblems like a pavement marked.” [The line is, “Arte pavimenti atque emblemate vermiculato;” literary compositions being compared by him to the artificial construction of a pavement.]

### Chap. 62.—Terrace-Roof Pavements.

The Greeks have also invented terrace-roof [“Subdialia;” more literally, “open-air pavements.”] pavements, and have covered their houses with them; a thing that may easily be done in the hotter climates, but a great mistake in countries where the rain is apt to become congealed. In making these pavements, the proper plan is to begin with two layers of boards, running different ways, and nailed at the extremities, to prevent them from warping. Upon this planking a rough-work must be laid, one-fourth of which consists of pounded pottery: and upon this, another bed of rough-work, two-fifths composed of lime, a foot in thickness, and well beaten down with the rammer. The nucleus [Or “kernel;” so called because it lay in the middle. Vitruvius says that it was composed of one part lime, and three parts pounded pottery.] is then laid down, a bed six fingers in depth; and upon that, large square stones, not less than a couple of fingers in thickness; an inclination being carefully observed, of an inch and a half to every ten feet. This done, the surface is well rubbed down with a polishing stone. The general opinion is, that oak [“Quercus.”] should never be used for the planking, it being so very liable to warp; and it is considered a good plan to cover the boards with a layer of fern or chaff, that they may be the better able to resist the action of the lime. It is necessary, too, before putting down the planking, to underset it with a bed of round pebbles. Wheat-ear [“Spicata testacea.” These pavements were probably so called because the bricks were laid at angles to each other (of about forty-five degrees), like the grains in an ear of wheat; or like the spines projecting from either side of the back-bone of a fish.] tesselated pavements are laid down in a similar manner.

### Chap. 63.—Græcanic Pavements.

We must not omit here one other kind of pavement, that known as the “Græcanic.” The ground is well rammed down, and a bed of rough work, or else broken pottery, is then laid upon it. Upon the top of this, a layer of charcoal is placed, well trodden down with a mixture of sand, lime, and ashes; care being taken, by line and rule, to give it a uniform thickness of half a foot. The surface then presents the ordinary appearance of the ground; but if it is well rubbed with the polishing-stone, it will have all the appearance of a black pavement.

### Chap. 64.—At What Period Mosaic Pavements Were First Invented. At What Period Arched Roofs Were First Decorated with Glass.

Mosaic [“Lithostrota.”] pavements were first introduced in the time of Sylla; at all events, there is still in existence a pavement, formed of small segments, which he ordered to be laid down in the Temple of Fortune, at Præneste. Since his time, these mosaics have left the ground for the arched roofs of houses, and they are now made of glass. This, however, is but a recent invention; for there can be no doubt that, when Agrippa ordered the earthenware walls of the hot baths, in the Thermæ which he was building at Rome, to be painted in encaustic, and had the other parts coated with pargetting, he would have had the arches decorated with mosaics in glass, if the use of them had been known; or, at all events, if from the walls of the Theatre of Scaurus, where it figured, as already [In Chapter of this Book.] stated, glass had by that time come to be used for the arched roofs of apartments. It will be as well, therefore, to give some account, also, of glass.

### Chap. 65. (26.)—The Origin of Glass.

In Syria there is a region known as Phœnice, [See B. v. c. 17.] adjoining to Judæa, and enclosing, between the lower ridges of Mount Carmelus, a marshy district known by the name of Cendebia. In this district, it is supposed, rises the river Belus, [See B. v. c. 19.] which, after a course of five miles, empties itself into the sea near the colony of Ptolemaïs. The tide of this river is sluggish, and the water unwholesome to drink, but held sacred for the observance of certain religious ceremonials. Full of slimy deposits, and very deep, it is only at the reflux of the tide that the river discloses its sands; which, agitated by the waves, separate themselves from their impurities, and so become cleansed. It is generally thought that it is the acridity of the sea-water that has this purgative effect upon the sand, and that without this action no use could be made of it. The shore upon which this sand is gathered is not more than half a mile in extent; and yet, for many ages, this was the only spot that afforded the material for making glass.

The story is, that a ship, laden with nitre, [A mineral alkali, Beckmann thinks; for it could not possibly be our saltpetre, he says. See B. xxxi. c. 46.] being moored upon this spot, the merchants, while preparing their repast upon the sea-shore, finding no stones at hand for supporting their cauldrons, employed for the purpose some lumps of nitre which they had taken from the vessel. Upon its being subjected to the action of the fire, in combination with the sand of the sea-shore, they beheld transparent streams flowing forth of a liquid hitherto unknown: this, it is said, was the origin of glass. [Beckmann discredits this story, because sand, he says, is not so easily brought to a state of fusion. Hist. Inv. Vol. II. p. 496. Bohn’s Edition.]

### Chap. 66.—The Various Kinds of Glass, and the Mode of Making It.

In process of time, as human industry is ingenious in discovering, it was not content with the combination of nitre, but magnet-stone [“Magnes lapis.” See B. xxxiv. c., and Chapter of this Book. Beckmann is of opinion that an ore of Manganese is meant, a substance which has a resemblance to the magnet, and is of the greatest utility in making glass. Hist. Inv. Vol. II. p. 237.] began to be added as well; from the impression that it attracts liquefied [This appears to be the meaning of “Quoniam in se liquorem vitri quoque ut ferrum trahere creditur.”] glass as well as iron. In a similar manner, too, brilliant stones of various descriptions came to be added in the melting, and, at last, shells and fossil sand. Some authors tell us, that the glass of India is made of broken crystal, and that, in consequence, there is none that can be compared to it.

In fusing it, light and dry wood is used for fuel, Cyprian copper and nitre being added to the melting, nitre of Ophir [In the description given by Isidorus in the “Origines,” which in other respects is similar, these words are omitted, and it is possible that they are a gloss by some one who was better acquainted with the Old Testament than with Pliny. On the other hand, as Sillig remarks, the Phœnicians may, at an early period, have imported into Greece a substance which they called “nitre of Ophir.”] more particularly. It is melted, like copper, in contiguous furnaces, and a swarthy mass of an unctuous appearance is the result. Of such a penetrating nature is the molten glass, that it will cut to the very bone any part of the body which “it may come near, and that, too, before it is even felt. This mass is again subjected to fusion in the furnace, for the purpose of colouring it; after which, the glass is either blown into various forms, turned in a lathe, or engraved [See Beckmann, Hist. Inv. Vol. II. p. 84.] like silver. Sidon was formerly famous for its glass-houses, for it was this place that first invented [“Excogitaverat.” Beckmann would seem to give this word the force only of “thought of,” for he gives it as his opinion that attempts were made at Sidon to form glass mirrors, but that the experiments had not completely succeeded. “Had this invention formed an epoch in the art of making mirrors, Pliny, in another place (B. xxxiii. c.), where he describes the various improvements of it so fully, would not have omitted it: but of those experiments he makes no further mention.” He also expresses an opinion that the Sidonian mirrors consisted of dark-coloured glass, resembling obsidian stone.”—Hist. Inv. Vol. II. pp. 69, 70. Bohn’s Edition.] mirrors.

Such was the ancient method of making glass: but, at the present day, there is found a very white sand for the purpose, at the mouth of the river Volturnus, in Italy. It spreads over an extent of six miles, upon the sea-shore that lies between Cumæ and Liternum, and is prepared for use by pounding it with a pestle and mortar; which done, it is mixed with three parts of nitre, either by weight or measure, and, when fused, is transferred to another furnace. Here it forms a mass of what is called “hammonitrum;” which is again submitted to fusion, and becomes a mass of pure, white, glass. Indeed, at the present day, throughout the Gallic and Spanish provinces even, we find sand subjected to a similar process. In the reign of Tiberius, it is said, a combination was devised which produced a flexible [Knowles says, in his Turkish History, p. 1273, that in 1610, among other rare presents sent to the King of Spain from the Sophy of Persia, there were six drinking-glasses, made of malleable glass so exquisitely tempered that they could not be broken.] glass; but the manufactory of the artist was totally destroyed, we are told, in order to prevent the value of copper, silver, and gold, from becoming depreciated. [Dion Cassius and Suetonius tell a similar story; and, according to one account, Tiberius ordered the artist to be put to death.] This story, however, was, for a long time, more widely spread than well authenticated. But be it as it may, it is of little consequence; for, in the time of the Emperor Nero, there was a process discovered, by which two small glass cups were made, of the kind called “petroti,” [This reading is doubtful. It would appear to mean “stone handled.” Another reading is “pterotos,” “with winged handles.”] the price of which was no less than six thousand sesterces!

### Chap. 67.—Obsian Glass and Obsian Stone.

Among the various kinds of glass, we may also reckon Obsian glass, a substance very similar to the stone [Volcanic glass, feldspar in a more or less pure state, our Obsidian, is probably meant; a word derived from the old reading, Obsidius, corrected by Sillig to Obsius.] which Obsius discovered in Æthiopia. This stone is of a very dark colour, and sometimes transparent; but it is dull to the sight, and reflects, when attached as a mirror to walls, the shadow of the object rather than the image. Many persons use it [He is speaking of the stone, not the glass that resembled it.] for jewellery, and I myself have seen solid statues [A thing very difficult to be done, as Beckmann observes, by reason of its brittleness.] in this material of the late Emperor Augustus, of very considerable thickness. That prince consecrated, in the Temple of Concord, as something marvellous, four figures of elephants made of Obsian stone. Tiberius Cæsar, too, restored to the people of Heliopolis, as an object of ceremonial worship, an image in this stone, which had been found among the property left by one of the præfects of Egypt. It was a figure of Menelaüs; a circumstance which goes far towards proving that the use of this material is of more ancient date than is generally supposed, confounded as it is at the present day with glass, by reason of its resemblance. Xenocrates says that Obsian stone is found in India also, and in Samnium in Italy; and that it is a natural product of Spain, upon the coasts which border on the Ocean. [The present Portugal.]

There is an artificial Obsian stone, made of coloured glass for services for the table; and there is also a glass that is red all through, and opaque, known as “hæmatinum.” [“Blood-red” glass.] A dead white glass, too, is made, as also other kinds in imitation of murrhine [See B. xxxvii. cc.,,. This glass was probably of an opal colour, like porcelain.] colour, hyacinthine, sapphire, and every other tint: indeed, there is no material of a more pliable [This passage is commented upon by Beckmann, Vol. II. p. 75, in connexion with a similar passage in Isidorus, Orig., which is probably corrupt.] nature than this, or better suited for colouring. Still, however, the highest value is set upon glass that is entirely colourless and transparent, as nearly as possible resembling crystal, in fact. For drinking-vessels, glass has quite superseded the use of silver and gold; but it is unable to stand heat unless a cold liquid is poured in first. And yet, we find that globular glass vessels, filled with water, when brought in contact with the rays of the sun, [See B. xxxvii. c.. He was not aware, apparently, that in such case they act as convex burning-glasses, and that ice even may be similarly employed.] become heated to such a degree as to cause articles of clothing to ignite. When broken, too, glass admits of being joined by the agency of heat; but it cannot be wholly fused without being pulverized into small fragments, [This is, probably, the meaning of “in guttas;” a new reading, which is only found in the Bamberg MS.] as we see done in the process of making the small checquers, known as “abaculi,” for mosaic work; some of which are of variegated colours, and of different shapes. If glass is fused with sulphur, it will become as hard as stone.

### Chap. 68. (27.)—Marvellous Facts Connected with Fire.

Having now described all the creations of human ingenuity, reproductions, in fact, of Nature by the agency of art, it cannot but recur to us, with a feeling of admiration, that there is hardly any process which is not perfected through the intervention of fire. Submit to its action some sandy soil, and in one place it will yield glass, in another silver, in another minium, and in others, again, lead and its several varieties, pigments, and numerous medicaments. It is through the agency of fire that stones [See B. xxxiv. c..] are melted into copper; by fire that iron is produced, and subdued to our purposes; by fire that gold is purified; by fire, too, that the stone is calcined, which is to hold together the walls of our houses.

Some materials, again, are all the better for being repeatedly submitted to the action of fire; and the same substance will yield one product at the first fusion, another at the second, and another at the third. [See B. xxxiv. c..] Charcoal, when it has passed through fire and has been quenched, only begins to assume its active properties; and, when it might be supposed to have been reduced to annihilation, it is then that it has its greatest energies. An element this, of immense, of boundless [“Improba” seems to be used here in much the some sense in which Virgil has said “Labor improbus”—“Unremitting labour.”] power, and, as to which, it is a matter of doubt whether it does not create even more than it destroys!

### Chap. 69.—Three Remedies Derived from Fire and from Ashes.

Fire even has certain medicinal virtues of its own. When pestilences prevail, in consequence of the obscuration [He alludes, probably, to eclipses of the sun.] of the sun, it is a well-known fact, that if fires are lighted, they are productive of beneficial results in numerous ways. Empedocles and Hippocrates have proved this in several passages.

“For convulsions or contusions of the viscera,” says M. Varro—for it is his own words that I use—“let the hearth be your medicine-box; for lie of ashes, [Acacia charcoal is still recommended as a valuable tonic, and as good for internal ulcerations and irritations of the mucous membrane.] taken from thence, mixed with your drink, will effect a cure. Witness the gladiators, for example, who, when disabled at the Games, refresh themselves with this drink.” Carbuncle too, a kind of disease which, as already [In B. xxvi. c. 4.] stated, has recently carried off two persons of consular rank, admits of being successfully treated with oak-charcoal, [“Querneus.”] triturated with honey. So true is it that things which are despised even, and looked upon as so utterly destitute of all virtues, have still their own remedial properties, charcoal and ashes for example.

### Chap. 70.—Prodigies Connected with the Hearth.

I must not omit too, one portentous fact connected with the hearth, and famous in Roman history. In the reign of Tarquinius Priscus, it is said, there appeared upon his hearth a resemblance of the male generative organ in the midst of the ashes. The captive Ocrisia, a servant of Queen Tanaquil, who happened to be sitting there, arose from her seat in a state of pregnancy, and became the mother of Servius Tullius, who eventually succeeded to the throne. [It is much more likely that he was the son of Tarquin himself, who not improbably, if indeed there ever was such a person, invented the story, to escape the wrath of Queen Tanaquil. This absurd story is mentioned also by Ovid, Arnobius, and Dionysius of Halicarnassus.] It is stated, too, that while the child was sleeping in the palace, a flame was seen playing round his head; the consequence of which was, that it was believed that the Lar of the household was his progenitor. It was owing to this circumstance, we are informed, that the Compitalia, [See B. iii. c. 9, and B. xix. c. 4.] games in honour of the Lares, were instituted.

Summary. —Remedies mentioned, eighty-nine. Facts and narratives, four hundred and thirty-four.

Roman Authors quoted. —M. Varro, [See end of B. ii. L. Cælius Antipater.] Cælius, [See end of B. ii.] Galba, [Probably Sulpicius Galba, who devoted his time to literary pursuits, and rose to no higher office than the prætorship, He was grand-father of the Emperor Galba, and wrote a historical work.] Cincius, [Another reading is “Ictius,” but nothing is known of either.] Mucianus, [See end of B. ii.] Nepos Cornelius, [See end of B. ii.] L. Piso, [See end of B. ii.] Q. Tubero, [See end of B. ii. and end of B. xviii.] Fabius Vestalis, [See end of B. vii.] Annius Fetialis, [See end of B. xvi.] Fabianus, [See end of B. ii. and end of B. xviii.] Seneca, [See end of B. vi.] Cato the Censor, [See end of B. iii.] Vitruvius. [See end of B. xvi.]

Foreign Authors quoted. —Theophrastus, [See end of B. iii.] Pasiteles, [See end of B..] King Juba, [See end of B. v.] Nicander, [See end of B. viii.] Sotacus, [All that we know of him is, that he wrote on Precious Stones. Apollonius Dyscolus mentions an author who wrote on the same subject, whose name was “Tacus;” and possibly the same person is meant.] Sudines, [Mentioned in this and the next Book, as a writer on Precious Stones.] Alexander [Cornelius Alexander. See end of B. iii.] Polyhistor, Apion, [See end of B. xxx.] Plistonicus, [See end of B. xx.] Duris, [See end of B. vii.] Herodotus, [See end of B. ii.] Euhemerus, [A Sicilian author of the time of Alexander. In his “Sacred History,” he interpreted the legends of the popular religion as based upon historical facts, and taught that the gods of Mythology were only deified men. His system has been compared with the rationalism of some German theologians, and Euhemerists were still to be found at the close of last century. Diodorus Siculus, Polybius, and Dionysius of Halicarnassus have followed in his track; and the poet Ennius translated his work, which is now lost.] Aristagoras, [A Greek writer on Egypt. He is often quoted by Stephanus Byzantinus, who says that he was not much younger than Plato. He is mentioned as a writer on the Pyramids of Egypt, in Chapter of this Book.] Dionysius, [See end of B. xii.] Artemidorus, [See end of B. ii.] Butoridas, [From the mention made of him in Chapter of this Book, he must have lived in the first century before, or the first century after Christ.] Antisthenes, [Possibly Antisthenes of Rhodes, a historian who lived about 200 B.C.] Demetrius, [Possibly the author mentioned by Athenæus, B. xv. as having written on Egypt. He is mentioned in Chapter of this Book.] Demoteles, [Hardouin thinks that he is the same person as Hermateles, mentioned by Tertullian, De Spectaculis, c. 8, as having written on Obelisks.] Lyceas. [A native of Naucratis, in Egypt, who wrote a work on that country, mentioned by Athenæus, and some Poems.]
