---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 67-81."
chapter_order: 201
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 67. (17.)—Remedies for Melancholy, Lethargy, and Phthisis.

For patients affected with melancholy, [Under this name, as Ajasson remarks, the affections now called “hysteria” are included.] calves’ dung, boiled in wine, is a very useful remedy. Persons are aroused from lethargy by applying to the nostrils the callosities from an ass’s legs steeped in vinegar, or the fumes of burnt goats’ horns or hair, or by the application of a wild boar’s liver: a remedy which is also used for confirmed [“Veternum.”] drowsiness.

The cure of phthisis is effected by taking a wolf’s liver boiled in thin wine; the bacon of a sow that has been fed upon herbs; or the flesh of a she-ass, eaten with the broth: this last mode in particular, being the one that is employed by the people of Achaia. They say too, that the smoke of dried cow-dung—that of the animal when grazing, I mean—is remarkably good for phthisis, inhaled through a reed; [Another instance of smoking, though not a very tempting one.] and find it stated that the tips of cows’ horns are burnt, and administered with honey, in doses of two spoonfuls, in the form of pills. Goat suet, many persons say, taken in a pottage of alica, [See B. xviii. c. 29.] or melted fresh with honied wine, in the proportion of one ounce of suet to one cyathus of wine, is good for cough and phthisis, care being taken to stir the mixture with a sprig of rue. One author of credit assures us that before now, a patient whose recovery has been despaired of, has been restored to health by taking one cyathus of wild goat [“Rupicapra”.] suet and an equal quantity of milk. Some writers, too, have stated that ashes of burnt swine’s dung are very useful, mixed with raisin wine; as also the lights of a deer, a spitter [“Subulo”.] deer in particular, smoke-dried and beaten up in wine.

### Chap. 68.—Remedies for Dropsy.

For dropsy, a wild boar’s urine is good, taken in small doses in the patient’s drink; it is of much greater efficacy, however, when it has been left to dry in the bladder of the animal. The ashes, too, of burnt cow-dung, and of bulls’ dung in particular—animals that are reared in herds, I mean—are highly esteemed. This dung, the name given to which is “bolbiton,” [From the Greek.] is reduced to ashes, and taken in doses of three spoonfuls to one semisextarius of honied wine; that of the female animal being used where the patient is a woman, and that of the other sex in the case of males; a distinction about which the magicians have made a sort of grand mystery. The dung of a bull-calf is also applied topically for this disease, and ashes of burnt calves’ dung are taken with seed of staphylinos, [See B. xix. c. 27, B. xx. c. 15, and B. xxv. c. 64.] in equal proportions, in wine. Goats’ blood also is used, with the marrow; but it is generally thought that the blood of the he-goat is the most efficacious, when the animal has fed upon lentisk, more particularly.

### Chap. 69.—Remedies for Erysipelas, and for Purulent Eruptions.

For erysipelas a liniment of bears’ grease is used, that from the kidneys in particular; fresh calves’ dung also, or cow-dung; dried goats’ milk cheese, with leeks; or else the fine scrapings of deer’s skin, brought off with pumice-stone and beaten up in vinegar. Where there is redness of the skin attended with itching, the foam from a horse’s mouth is used, or the hoof, reduced to ashes.

For the cure of purulent [“Eruptionibus pituitæ.”] eruptions ashes of burnt asses’ dung are applied, with butter; and for the removal of swarthy pimples, dried goats’ milk cheese, steeped in honey and vinegar, is applied in the bath, no oil being used. Pustules are treated with ashes of swine’s dung, applied with water, or else ashes of deer’s antlers.

### Chap. 70.—Remedies for Sprains, Indurations, and Boils.

For the cure of sprains the following applications are used; wild boars’ dung or swine’s dung; calves’ dung; wild boars’ foam, used fresh with vinegar; goats’ dung, applied with honey; and raw beef, used as a plaster. For swellings, swine’s dung is used, warmed in an earthen pot, and beaten up with oil. The best emollient for all kinds of indurations upon the body is wolf’s fat, applied topically. In the case of sores which are wanted to break, the most effectual plan is to apply cow-dung warmed in hot ashes, or else goats’ dung boiled in vinegar or wine. For the cure of boils, beef-suet is applied with salt; but if they are attended with pain, it is melted with oil, and no salt is used. Goat-suet is employed in a similar manner.

### Chap. 71.—Remedies for Burns. The Method of Testing Bull-glue; Seven Remedies Derived from It.

For the treatment of burns, bears’ grease is used, with lily roots; dried wild boars’ dung also, or swine’s dung; the ashes of burnt bristles, extracted from plasterers’ brushes, beaten up with grease; the pastern-bone of an ox, reduced to ashes, and mixed with wax and bull’s marrow or deer’s marrow; or the dung of a hare. The dung, too, of a she-goat, they say, will effect a cure without leaving any scars.

The best glue is that prepared from the ears and genitals of the bull, and there is no better cure in existence for burns. There is nothing, however, that is more extensively adulterated; which is done by boiling up all kinds of old skins, and shoes even, for the purpose. The Rhodian glue is the purest of all, and it is this that painters and physicians mostly use. The whiter it is, the more highly glue is esteemed: that, on the other hand, which is black and brittle like wood, is looked upon as good for nothing.

### Chap. 72.—Remedies for Affections of the Sinews and for Contusions.

For pains in the sinews, goats’ dung, boiled in vinegar with honey, is considered one of the most useful remedies, and this even where the sinew [Where the sinew has been wounded and exposed, either vinegar or honey, Ajasson remarks, would be a highly dangerous application.] is threatened with putrefaction. Strains and contusions are healed with wild boars’ dung, that has been gathered in spring and dried. A similar method is employed where persons have been dragged by a chariot or lacerated by the wheels, or have received contusions in any other way, the application being quite as effectual, should the dung happen to be fresh. Some think it a better plan, however, to boil it in vinegar; and if only powdered and taken in vinegar, they vouch for its good effects where persons are ruptured, wounded internally, or suffering from the effects of a fall.

Others again, who are of a more scrupulous tendency, [“Reverentiores.”] take the ashes of it in water; and the Emperor Nero, it is said, was in the habit of refreshing himself with this drink, when he attempted to gain the public applause at the three-horse chariot races. [“Trigario.”] Swine’s dung, it is generally thought, is the next best to that of the goat.

### Chap. 73. (18.)—Remedies for Hæmorrhage.

Hæmorrhage is arrested by applying deer’s rennet with vinegar, hare’s rennet, hare’s fur reduced to ashes, or ashes of burnt asses’ dung. The dung, however, of male animals is the most efficacious for this purpose, being mixed with vinegar, and applied with wool, in all cases of hæmorrhage. In the same way, too, the ashes of a horse’s head or thigh, or of burnt calves’ dung, are used with vinegar; the ashes also of a goat’s horns or dung, with vinegar. But it is the thick blood that issues from the liver of a he-goat when cut asunder, that is looked upon as the most efficacious; or else the ashes of the burnt liver of a goat of either sex, taken in wine or applied to the nostrils with vinegar. The ashes, too, of a leather wine-bottle—but only when made of he-goat skin—are used very efficiently with an equal quantity of resin, for the purpose of stanching blood, and knitting together the lips of the wound. A kid’s rennet in vinegar, or the thighs of that animal, reduced to ashes, are said to be productive of a similar result.

### Chap. 74.—Remedies for Ulcers and Carcinomatous Sores.

Ulcers upon the legs and thighs are cured by an application of bears’ grease, mixed with red earth: and those of a serpiginous nature by using wild boar’s gall, with resin and white lead; the jaw-bone of a wild boar or swine, reduced to ashes; swine’s dung in a dry state; or goats’ dung, made luke-warm in vinegar. For other kinds of ulcers butter is used, as a detergent, and as tending to make new flesh; ashes of deer’s antlers, or deer’s marrow; or else bull’s gall, mixed with oil of cyprus [See B. xii. c. 51.] or oil of iris. Wounds inflicted with edged weapons are rubbed with fresh swine’s dung, or with dried swine’s dung, powdered. When ulcers are phagedænic or fistulous, bull’s gall is injected, with leek-juice or woman’s milk; or else bull’s blood, dried and powdered, with the plant cotyledon. [See B. xxv. c. 101.]

Carcinomatous sores are treated with hare’s rennet, sprinkled upon them with an equal proportion of capers in wine; gangrenes, with bears’ grease, applied with a feather; and ulcers of a serpiginous nature with the ashes of an ass’s hoofs, powdered upon them. The blood of the horse corrodes the flesh by virtue of certain septic powers which it possesses; dried horse-dung, too, reduced to ashes, has a similar effect. Those kinds of ulcers which are commonly known as “phagedænic,” are treated with the ashes of a cow’s hide, mixed with honey. Calves’ flesh, as also cow-dung mixed with honey, prevents recent wounds from swelling. The ashes of a leg of veal, applied with woman’s milk, are a cure for sordid ulcers, and the malignant sore known as “cacoëthes:” [“Bad habit.” A sort of cancer, or malignant ulcer.] bull-glue, melted, is applied to recent wounds inflicted with edged weapons, the application being removed before the end of three days. Dried goats’ milk cheese, applied with vinegar and honey, acts as a detergent upon ulcers; and goat suet, used in combination with wax, arrests the spread of serpiginous sores: if employed with pitch and sulphur, it will effect a thorough cure. The ashes of a kid’s leg, applied with woman’s milk, have a similar effect upon malignant ulcers; for the cure, too, of carbuncles, a sow’s brains are roasted and applied.

### Chap. 75.—Remedies for the Itch.

The itch in man is cured very effectually by using the marrow of an ass, or the urine of that animal, applied with the mud it has formed upon the ground. Butter, too, is very good; as also in the case of beasts of burden, if applied with warmed resin: bull glue is also used, melted in vinegar, and incorporated with lime; or goat’s gall, mixed with calcined alum. The eruption called “boa,” [See B. xxiv. c. 35.] is treated with cow-dung, a fact to which it is indebted for its name. The itch in dogs is cured by an application of fresh cows’ blood, which, when quite dry, is renewed a second time, and is rubbed off the next day with strong lie-ashes.

### Chap. 76.—Methods of Extracting Foreign Substances Which Adhere to the Body, and of Restoring Scars to Their Natural Colour.

Thorns and similar foreign substances are extracted from the body by using cats’ dung, or that of she-goats, with wine; the rennet also of any kind of animal, that of the hare more particularly, with powdered frankincense and oil, or an equal quantity of mistletoe, or else with bee-glue. [“Propolis.” See B. xi. c. 6.]

Ass suet restores scars of a swarthy hue to their natural colour; and they are equally effaced by using calf’s gall made warm. Medical men add myrrh, honey, and saffron, and keep the mixture in a copper box; some, too, incorporate with it flower of copper.

### Chap. 77. (19.)—Remedies for Female Diseases.

Menstruation is promoted by using bull’s gall, in unwashed wool, as a pessary: Olympias of Thebes adds hyssop and nitre. Ashes, too, of deer’s horns are taken in drink for the same purpose, and for derangements of the uterus they are applied topically, as also bull’s gall, used as a pessary with opium, in the proportion of two oboli. It is a good plan, too, to use fumigations for the uterus, made with deer’s hair, burnt. Hinds, they say, when they find themselves pregnant, are in the habit of swallowing a small stone. This stone, when found in their excrements, or in the uterus—for it is to be found there as well—attached to the body as an amulet, is a preventive of abortion. There are also certain small stones, found in the heart and uterus of these animals, which are very useful for women during pregnancy and in travail. As to the kind of pumice-stone which is similarly found in the uterus of the cow, we have already [In B. xi. c. 79.] mentioned it when treating of the formation of that animal.

A wolf’s fat, applied externally, acts emolliently upon the uterus, and the liver of a wolf is very soothing for pains in that organ. It is found advantageous for women, when near delivery, to eat wolf’s flesh, or, if they are in travail, to have a person near them who has eaten it; so much so, indeed, that it will act as a countercharm even to any noxious spells which may have been laid upon them. In case, however, a person who has eaten wolf’s flesh should happen to enter the room at the moment of parturition, dangerous effects will be sure to follow. The hare, too, is remarkably useful for the complaints of females: the lights of that animal, dried and taken in drink, are beneficial to the uterus; the liver, taken in water with Samian earth, acts as an emmenagogue; and the rennet brings away the after-birth, due care being taken by the patient not to bathe the day before. Applied in wool as a pessary, with saffron and leek-juice, this last acts as an expellent upon the dead fœtus. It is a general opinion that the uterus of a hare, taken with the food, promotes the conception of male offspring, and that a similar effect is produced by using the testes and rennet of that animal. It is thought, too, that a leveret, taken from the uterus of its dam, is a restorative of fruitfulness to women who are otherwise past child-bearing. But it is the blood of a hare’s fœtus that the magicians recommend males to drink: while for young girls they prescribe nine pellets of hare’s dung, to ensure a durable firmness to the breasts. For a similar purpose, also, they apply hare’s rennet with honey; and to prevent hairs from growing again when once removed, they use a liniment of hare’s blood.

For inflations of the uterus, it is found a good plan to apply wild boars’ dung or swine’s dung topically with oil: but a still more effectual remedy is to dry the dung, and sprinkle it, powdered, in the patient’s drink, even though she should be in a state of pregnancy or suffering the pains of child-birth. By administering sow’s milk with honied wine, parturition is facilitated; and if taken by itself it will promote the secretion of the milk when deficient in nursing women. By rubbing the breasts of females with sow’s blood they are prevented from becoming too large. If pains are felt in the breasts, they will be alleviated by drinking asses’ milk; and the same milk, taken with honey, has considerable efficacy as an emmenagogue. Stale fat, too, from the same animal, heals ulcerations of the uterus: applied as a pessary, in wool, it acts emolliently upon indurations of that organ; and, applied fresh by itself, or in water when stale, it has all the virtues of a depilatory.

An ass’s milt, dried and applied in water to the breasts, promotes the secretion of the milk; and used in the form of a fumigation, it acts as a corrective upon the uterus. A fumigation made with a burnt ass’s hoof, placed beneath a woman, accelerates parturition, so much so, indeed, as to expel the dead fœtus even: hence it is that it should only be employed in cases of miscarriage, it having a fatal effect upon the living fœtus. Asses’ dung, applied fresh, has a wonderful effect, they say, in arresting discharges of blood in females: the same, too, with the ashes of this dung, which, used as a pessary, are very good for the uterus. If the skin is rubbed with the foam from a horse’s mouth for forty days together, before the first hair has made its appearance, it will effectually prevent the growth thereof: a decoction, too, made from deer’s antlers is productive of a similar effect, being all the better if they are used quite fresh. Mares’ milk, used as an injection, is highly beneficial to the uterus.

Where the fœtus is felt to be dead in the uterus, the lichens or excrescences from a horse’s legs, taken in fresh, water, will act as an expellent: an effect produced also by a fumigation made with the hoofs or dry dung of that animal. Procidence of the uterus is arrested by using butter, in the form of an injection; and indurations of that organ are removed by similarly employing ox-gall, with oil of roses, turpentine being applied externally in wool. They say, too, that a fumigation, made from ox-dung, acts as a corrective upon procidence of the uterus, and facilitates parturition; and that conception is promoted by the use of cows’ milk. It is a well-known fact that sterility is often entailed by suffering in child-birth; an evil which may be averted, Olympias of Thebes assures us, by rubbing the parts, before sexual intercourse, with bull’s gall, serpents’ fat, verdigrease, and honey. In cases, too, where menstruation is too abundant, the external parts should be sprinkled with a solution of calf’s gall, the moment before the sexual congress; a method which acts emolliently also upon indurations of the abdomen. Applied to the navel as a liniment, it arrests excessive discharges, and is generally beneficial to the uterus. The proportions generally adopted are—one denarius of gall, one-third of a denarius of opium, and as much oil of almonds as may appear to be requisite; the whole being applied in sheep’s wool. The gall, too, of a bull-calf is beaten up with half the quantity of honey, and kept in readiness for the treatment of uterine diseases. If a woman about the time of conception eats roasted veal with the plant aristolochia, [See B. xxv. cc. 79, 84, 91.] she will bring forth a male child, we are assured. Calf’s marrow, boiled in wine and water with the suet, and applied as a pessary, is good for ulcerations of the uterus; the same, too, with foxes’ fat and cats’ dung, the last being applied with resin and oil of roses.

It is considered a remarkably good plan to subject the uterus to fumigations made with burnt goats’ horns. The blood of the wild goat, mixed with sea-palm, [See B. xiii. c. 49.] acts as a depilatory. The gall of the other kinds of goat, used as an injection, acts emolliently upon callosities of the uterus, and ensures conception immediately after menstruation: it possesses also the virtues of a depilatory, the application being left for three days upon the flesh after the hair has been removed. The midwives assure us that she-goats’ urine, taken in drink, and the dung, applied topically, will arrest uterine discharges, however much in excess. The membrane in which the kid is enclosed in the uterus, dried and taken in wine, acts as an expellent upon the after-birth. For affections of the uterus, it is thought a desirable plan to fumigate it with burnt kids’ hair; and for discharges of blood, kids’ rennet is administered in drink, or seed of henbane is applied. According to Osthanes, if a woman’s loins are rubbed with blood taken from the ticks upon a black wild bull, she will be inspired with an aversion to sexual intercourse: she will forget, too, her former love, by taking a he-goat’s urine in drink, some nard being mixed with it to disguise the loathsome taste.

### Chap. 78.—Remedies for the Diseases of Infants.

For infants there is nothing more useful than butter, [There is probably some truth in these statements as to the utility of butter and honey for infants.] either by itself or in combination with honey; for dentition more particularly, for soreness of the gums, and for ulcerations of the mouth. A wolf’s tooth, attached to the body, prevents infants from being startled, and acts as a preservative against the maladies attendant upon dentition; an effect equally produced by making use of a wolf’s skin. The larger teeth, also, of a wolf, attached to a horse’s neck, will render him proof against all weariness, it is said. A hare’s rennet, applied to the breasts of the nurse, effectually prevents diarrhœa in the infant suckled by her. An ass’s liver, mixed with a little panax, and dropped into the mouth of an infant, will preserve it from epilepsy and other diseases to which infants are liable; this, however, must be done for forty days, they say. An ass’s skin, too, thrown over infants, renders them insensible to fear. The first teeth shed by a horse, attached as an amulet to infants, facilitate dentition, and are better still, when not allowed to touch the ground. For pains in the spleen, an ox’s milt is administered in honey, and applied topically; and for running ulcers it is used as an application, with honey. A calf’s milt, boiled in wine, is beaten up, and applied to incipient ulcers of the mouth.

The magicians take the brains of a she-goat, and, after passing them through a gold ring, drop them into the mouth of the infant before it takes the breast, as a preservative against epilepsy and other infantile diseases. Goats’ dung, attached to infants in a piece of cloth, prevents them from being restless, female infants in particular. By rubbing the gums of infants with goats’ milk or hare’s brains, dentition is greatly facilitated.

### Chap. 79.—Provocatives of Sleep.

Cato was of opinion that hare’s flesh, [Ajasson explains this by saying that the hare being eaten by the people of ancient Latium on festival days, with plenteous potations, they erroneously supposed the narcotic effects of the wine to be produced by the flesh of the hare.] taken as a diet, is provocative of sleep. It is a vulgar notion, too, that this diet confers beauty for nine days on those who use it; a silly play [The resemblance of “lepos,” “grace,” to “lepus,” “a hare.” See Martial, B. v. Ep. 29.] upon words, no doubt, but a notion which has gained far too extensively not to have had some real foundation. According to the magicians, the gall of a she-goat, but only of one that has been sacrificed, applied to the eyes or placed beneath the pillow, has a narcotic effect. Too profuse perspiration is checked by rubbing the body with ashes of burnt goats’ horns mixed with oil of myrtle.

### Chap. 80.—Stimulants for the Sexual Passions.

Among the aphrodisiacs, we find mentioned, a wild boar’s gall, applied externally; swine’s marrow, taken inwardly; asses’ fat, mixed with the grease of a gander and applied as a liniment; the virulent substance described by Virgil [Georg. iii. 280. He alludes to the “hippomanes.”] as distilling from mares when covered; and the dried testes of a horse, pulverized and mixed with the drink. The right testicle, also, of an ass, is taken in a proportionate quantity of wine, or worn attached to the arm in a bracelet; or else the froth discharged by that animal after covering, collected in a piece of red cloth and enclosed in silver, as Osthanes informs us. Salpe recommends the genitals of this animal to be plunged seven times in boiling oil, and the corresponding parts to be well rubbed therewith. Bialcon [Hardouin is probably right in his suggestion that “Dalion” is the correct reading here.] says that these genitals should be reduced to ashes and taken in drink; or else the urine that has been voided by a bull immediately after covering: he recommends, also, that the groin should be well rubbed with earth moistened with this urine.

Mouse-dung, on the other hand, applied in the form of a liniment, acts as an antaphrodisiac. The lights of a wild boar or swine, roasted, are an effectual preservative against drunkenness; they must, however, be eaten fasting, and upon the same day. The lights of a kid, too, are productive of the same effect.

### Chap. 81. (20.)—Remarkable Facts Relative to Animals.

In addition to those already mentioned, there are various other marvellous facts related, with reference to these animals. When a horse-shoe becomes detached from the hoof, as often is the case, if a person takes it up and puts it by, it will act as a remedy for hiccup the moment he calls to mind the spot where he has placed it. A wolf’s liver, they say, is similar to a horse’s hoof in appearance; and a horse, they tell us, if it follows in the track of a wolf, will burst [He has already stated, in c. 44, that a horse will become torpid if it follows in the track of a wolf; for which statement, according to Ajasson, there appears to be some foundation.] asunder beneath its rider. The pastern-bones of swine have a certain tendency to promote discord, it is said. In cases of fire, if some of the dung can be brought away from the stalls, both sheep and oxen may be got out all the more easily, and will make no attempt to return. The flesh of a he-goat will lose its rank smell, if the animal has eaten barley-bread, or drunk an infusion of laser [See B. xix. c. 15.] the day on which it was killed. Meat that has been salted while the moon was on the wane, will never be attacked by worms. In fact, so great has been the care taken to omit no possible researches, that a deaf hare, we find, will grow fat [This is not unlikely; for it has no alarms to make it grow thin.] sooner than one that can hear!

As to the remedies for the diseases of animals—If a beast of burden voids blood, an injection must be used of swine’s dung mixed with wine. For the maladies of oxen, a mixture of suet is used with quicksilver, and wild garlic boiled; the whole beaten up and administered in wine. The fat, too, of a fox is employed. The liquor of boiled horse-flesh, administered in their drink, is recommended for the cure of diseased swine: and, indeed, the maladies of all four-footed beasts may be effectually treated by boiling a she-goat whole, in her skin, along with a bramble-frog. Poultry, they say, will never be touched by a fox, if they have eaten the dried liver of that animal, or if the cock, when treading the hen, has had a piece of fox’s skin about his neck. The same property, too, is attributed to a weazel’s gall. The oxen in the Isle of Cyprus cure themselves of gripings in the abdomen, it is said, by swallowing [See B. viii. c. 41, as to a similar practice on the part of the panther.] human excrements: the feet, too, of oxen will never be worn to the quick, if their hoofs are well rubbed with tar before they begin work. Wolves will never approach a field, if, after one has been caught and its legs broken and throat cut, the blood is dropped little by little along the boundaries of the field, and the body buried on the spot from which it was first dragged. The share, too, with which the first furrow in the field has been traced in the current year, should be taken from the plough, and placed upon the hearth of the Lares, where the family is in the habit of meeting, and left there till it is consumed: so long as this is in doing, no wolf will attack any animal in the field.

We will now turn to an examination of those animals which, being neither tame nor wild, are of a nature peculiar to themselves.

Summary. —Remedies, narratives, and observations, one thousand six hundred and eighty-two.

Roman Authors Quoted. —M. Varro, [See end of B. ii.] L. Piso, [See end of B. ii.] Fabianus, [For Fabianus Papirius, see end of B. ii. For Fabianus Sabinus, see end of B. xviii.] Valerius Antias, [See end of B. ii.] Verrius Flaccus, [See end of B. iii.] Cato the Censor, [See end of B. iii.] Servius Sulpicius, [Servius Sulpicius Lemonia Rufus, a contemporary and friend of Cicero. He was Consul with M. Claudius Marcellus, B.C. 51, and died B.C. 43, at the siege of Mutina. He left about 180 treatises on various subjects; but beyond the fact that he is often quoted by the writers whose works form part of the Digest, none of his writings (with the exception of two letters to Cicero) have come down to us.] Licinius Macer, [See end of B. xix.] Celsus, [See end of B. vii.] Massurius, [See end of B. vii.] Sextius Niger [See end of B. xii.] who wrote in Greek, Bithus [From the mention made of him in Chap. 23, he was probably a physician. Nothing further is known of him.] of Dyrrhachium, Opilius [Aurelius Opilius, the freedman of an Epicurean. He taught philosophy, rhetoric, and grammar at Rome, but finally withdrew to Smyrna. One of his works, mentioned by A. Gellius, was entitled “Musæ,” and the name of another was “Pinax.”] the physician, Granius [From the mention made of his profound speculations in Chap. 9, Fabricius has reckoned him among the medical writers of Rome. It has also been suggested that he may have been the Granius Flaccus mentioned by Censorinus as the author of the “Indigitamenta,” or Register of the Pontiffs.] the physician.

Foreign authors quoted.—Democritus, [See end of B. ii.] Apollonius [Probably Apollonius Mus, or Myronides, a physician who flourished in the first century B.C., who is mostly identified with Apollonius Herophileius. His “Myrosis” here mentioned is probably the work “On Unguents” mentioned by Athenæus, B. xv.] who wrote the “Myrosis,” Miletus, [Nothing whatever is known of him. It has been suggested that the name may have been “Melitus.” A contemporary of Socrates, an orator and tragic writer, was so named.] Artemon, [Beyond the mention of him in c. 2 of this Book, nothing is known relative to this medical writer: no great loss, perhaps, if we may judge from the extract there given.] Sextilius, [Though mentioned among the foreign writers, the name is evidently Roman. Nothing relative to him is known.] Antæus, [See end of B. xii.] Homer, Theophrastus, [See end of B. iii.] Lysimachus, [Probably the writer mentioned at the end of B. viii.] Attalus, [See end of B. viii.] Xenocrates, [See end of B. xx.] Orpheus [See end of B. xx. The “Idiophya” was probably a work “On the Peculiar Animals,” which passed as the composition of the mythic Orpheus.] who wrote the “Idiophya,” Archelaüs [A Greek poet, said to have been born at Chersonesus, a town in Egypt. Some of his Epigrams are still extant in the Anthology, and it has been suggested that he flourished either in the time of Ptolemy Soter, of Ptolemy Euergetes II., or of Ptolemy Philadelphus. His work “On Peculiar Animals,” here mentioned, was probably written in verse.] who wrote a similar work, Demetrius, [See end of B. viii.] Sotira, [A female writer on medical subjects. In addition to her work mentioned in Chap. 23 of this Book, Labbe speaks of a work of hers in MS. “On Menstruation,” preserved in the Library at Florence.] Laïs, [The female who is mentioned in Chap. 23 of this Book as having written on Abortion, or the Diseases peculiar to Females, was probably a different person from either of the two famous courtesans of that name. Nothing whatever is known of her.] Elephantis, [The writer of certain amatory poems, much admired by the Emperor Tiberius, generally supposed, from the grammatical form of the name, to have been a female. Galen quotes a work “On Cosmetics,” as written by a person of this name.] Salpe, [A native of Lemnos, who wrote on the Diseases of Women. Nymphodorus, as quoted by Athenæus, states that she also wrote verses on Sportive subjects.] Olympias [See end of B. xx.] of Thebes, Diotimus [Beyond the mention made of him in c. 23, nothing further is known relative to this writer. Theophrastus, in his work on Sudorifics, speaks of a person of this name as having written on Perspiration.] of Thebes, Iollas, [See end of B. xii.] Andreas, [See end of B. xx.] Marcion [Beyond the mention made of him in c. 7 of this Book, nothing is known of this writer. Hardouin suggests that he may have been identical with the Micton mentioned at the end of B. xx.] of Smyrna, Æschines [He is spoken of as a native of Athens, in c. 10 of this Book. Beyond this, nothing is known of him.] the physician, Hippocrates, [See end of B. vii.] Aristotle, [See end of B. ii.] Metrodorus [See end of B. iii.] of Scepsos, Icetidas [Or more probably, Hicetidas. Nothing is known of this writer.] the physician, Apelles [A native of Thasos. He is also mentioned by Galen.] the physician, Hesiod, [See end of B. vii.] Dalion, [See end of B. vi.] Cæcilius, [Probably a physician, of whom Athenæus speaks as being a native of Argos, and writer of a treatise on Fish.] Bion [Probably a different writer from the one of that name mentioned at the end of B. vi.] who wrote “On Powers,” [Περὶ δυνάμεων.] Anaxilaüs, [See end of B. xxi.] King Juba. [See end of B. v.]
