---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 1-16."
chapter_order: 186
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 1. (1.)—New Forms of Disease.

The face of man has recently been sensible of new forms of disease, unknown [Probably as Littré suggests, a peculiar form of elephantiasis, the leprosy of the middle ages.] in ancient times, not only to Italy, but to almost the whole of Europe. Still, however, they have not as yet extended to the whole of Italy, nor have they made any very great inroads in Illyricum, Gaul, or Spain, or indeed any other parts, to so great an extent as in Rome and its environs. Though unattended with pain, and not dangerous to life, these diseases are of so loathsome a nature, that any form of death would be preferable to them.

### Chap. 2.—The Nature of Lichen.

The most insupportable of all these diseases is the one which, after its Greek appellation, is known to us as “lichen.” [Probably as Littré suggests, a peculiar form of elephantiasis, the leprosy of the middle ages.] In consequence, however, of its generally making its first appearance at the chin, the Latins, by way of joke, originally—so prone are mankind to make a jest of the misfortunes of others—gave it the name of “mentagra;” [The “chin disease:” from “mentum,” the “chin.” It is difficult to detect the joke which has here incurred the censure of our author.] an appellation which has since become established in general use. In many cases, however, this disease spreads over the interior of the mouth, and takes possession of the whole face, with the sole exception of the eyes; after which, it passes downwards to the neck, breast, and hands, covering them with foul furfuraceous eruptions.

### Chap. 3.—At What Period Lichen First Made Its Appearance in Italy.

This curse was unknown to the ancients, [Meaning the people of Italy.] and in the times of our fathers even, having first entered Italy in the middle of the reign of the Emperor Tiberius [It is somewhat difficult to say whether Tiberius, the predecessor, or Claudius, the successor of Caligula, is meant; most probably the latter, as the former’s reign would have been in the times of “our fathers.”] Claudius Cæsar; where it was introduced from Asia, [Asia Minor.] in which country it had lately made [“Cum apparuisset.” He is probably wrong here, for leprosy was known in Asia from the very earliest times.] its appearance, by a member of the equestrian order at Rome, a native of Perusium, secretary to the quæstor. The disease, however, did not attack either females or slaves, [This assertion as to the slaves and lower orders is somewhat doubtful, though it is very possible that the diet and habits of the higher orders may have predisposed them more particularly for the attacks of the diseases.] nor yet the lower orders, or, indeed, the middle classes, but only the nobles, being communicated even by the momentary contact requisite for the act of salutation. [“Osculi”, “kissing;” a nauseous and silly practice, still adhered to, between bearded men even, in many parts of Europe.] Many of those who persevered in undergoing a course of remedial treatment, though cured of the disease, retained scars upon the body more hideous even than the malady itself; it being treated with cauteries, as it was certain to break out afresh, unless means were adopted for burning it out of the body by cauterizing to the very bone.

Upon this occasion several physicians repaired to Rome from Egypt, that fruitful parent of maladies of this nature, men who devoted themselves solely to this branch of medical practice; and very considerable were the profits they made. At all events, it is a well-known fact that Manilius Cornutus, a personage of prætorian rank, and legatus of the province of Aquitania, expended no less a sum than two hundred thousand [Upwards of £1500.] sesterces upon his cure.

It is much more frequently, on the other hand, that we hear of new forms of diseases attacking the lower orders; a singular fact, and one quite unequalled for the marvellous phænomena which sometimes attend these outbreaks. Thus, for instance, we find an epidemic suddenly making its appearance in a certain country, and then confining itself, as though it had made its election so to do, to certain parts of the body, certain ages, and even certain pursuits in life. In the same way, too, while one class of diseases attacks the young, another confines itself to adults; while one malady extends itself only to the higher classes, another is felt exclusively by the poor.

### Chap. 4.—Carbuncle.

We find it stated in the Annals, that it was in the censorship [A.U.C. 590.] of L. Paulus and Q. Marcius that carbuncle [“Carbunculus.” A malignant pustule, accompanied with swelling and ending with gangrene, is still known by this name, but it does not manifest any particular preference for the mouth and tongue. Fée says that carbuncle was recently (1833) endemic in Provence, the ancient Gallia Narbonensis, for which reason it had received the name of “Charbon Provençal.”] was first introduced into Italy, a malady which till then had confined itself solely to the province of Gallia Narbonensis. In the year in which I am writing these lines, two persons of consular rank have died of this disease, Julius Rufus [Consul, A.U.C. 819.] and Q. Lecanius Bassus; [Consul, A.U.C. 816.] the former in consequence of an incision unskilfully made by his medical attendants, the latter through a wound upon the thumb of the left hand by pricking a carbuncle with a needle, a wound so small originally as to be hardly perceptible.

This disease makes its appearance in the more hidden [Judging from this symptom, Dalechamps says that it looks more like chancre than carbuncle.] parts of the human body, and mostly beneath the tongue. It originally has the form of a hard, red, pimple, with a blackish head mostly, though sometimes of a livid colour. It produces tension of the flesh, but unattended with swelling, pain, or any itching sensation; indeed, the only symptom that accompanies it is a confirmed drowsiness, which overpowers the patient, and carries him off in the course of three days. Sometimes, however, it is accompanied with shuddering, and small pustules about the sore; and occasionally, though but rarely, with fever. When these symptoms extend to the fauces and œsophagus, death ensues with the greatest rapidity.

### Chap. 5.—Elephantiasis.

We have already [In B. xx. c. 52.] stated that elephantiasis [Supposed, as Pliny says, to have originally come from Upper Egypt. Lucretius, B. vi. l. 1111, et seq., attributes it to the water of the Nile. It is but rarely known in Europe.] was unknown in Italy before the time of Pompeius Magnus. This malady, too, like those already mentioned, mostly makes its first appearance in the face. In its primary form it bears a considerable resemblance to a small lentil upon the nose; the skin gradually dries up all over the body, is marked with spots of various colours, and presents an unequal surface, being thick in one place, thin in another, indurated every here and there, and covered with a sort of rough scab. At a later period, the skin assumes a black hue, and compresses the flesh upon the bones, the fingers and toes becoming swollen.

This disease was originally peculiar to Egypt. Whenever it attacked the kings of that country, it was attended with peculiarly fatal effects to the people, it being the practice to temper their sitting-baths with human blood, for the treatment of the disease. As for Italy, however, its career was very soon cut short: the same was the case, too, with the disease known as “gemursa” [Fée thinks that this may have been a sort of abscess similar to those between the fingers which are known as fourches by the French, and by medical men as “Aposthema phalangum.” Gruner considers it to be a sort of Elephantiasis, and Triller identifies it with the disease called Gumretha by the Talmudists.] to the ancients, a malady which made its appearance between the toes, and the very name of which is now buried in oblivion.

### Chap. 6.—Colic.

It is a remarkable fact that some diseases should disappear from among us, while others, again, should continue to prevail, colic [“Colum.” Fée takes this to be Schirrus of the colon.] for example. It was only in the reign of Tiberius Cæsar that this malady made its appearance in Italy, the emperor himself being the first to be attacked by it; a circumstance which produced considerable mystification throughout the City, when it read the edict issued by that prince excusing his inattention to public business, on the ground of his being laid up with a disease, the very name of which was till then unknown. To what cause are we to attribute these various diseases, or how is it that we have thus incurred the anger of the gods? Was it deemed too little for man to be exposed to fixed and determinate classes of maladies, already more than three hundred in number, that he must have new forms of disease to alarm him as well? And then, in addition to all these, not less in number are the troubles and misfortunes which man brings upon himself!

The remedies which I am here describing, are those which were universally employed in ancient times, Nature herself, so to say, making up the medicines: indeed, for a long time these were the only medicines employed.

(2.) Hippocrates, [See B. xxix. c. i.] it is well known, was the first to compile a code of medical precepts, a thing which he did with the greatest perspicuity, as his treatises, we find, are replete with information upon the various plants. No less is the information which we gain from the works of Diocles [See end of B. xx.] of Carystus, second only in reputation, as well as date, to Hippocrates. The same, too, with reference to the works of Praxagoras, Chrysippus, and, at a later period, Erasistratus [See B. xxix. c. 3.] of Cos. Herophilus [See B. xxix. c. 5.] too, though himself the founder of a more refined system of medicine, was extremely profuse of his commendations of the use of simples. At a later period, however, experience, our most efficient instructor in all things, medicine in particular, gradually began to be lost sight of in mere words and verbiage: it being found, in fact, much more agreeable to sit in schools, and to listen to the talk of a professor, than to go a simpling in the deserts, and to be searching for this plant or that at all the various seasons of the year.

### Chap. 7. (3.)—The New System of Medicine: Asclepiades the Physician.

Still, however, the ancient theories remained unshaken, based as they were upon the still existing grounds of universally acknowledged experience; until, in the time of Pompeius Magnus, Asclepiades, [See end of B. vii.] a professor of rhetoric, who considered himself not sufficiently repaid by that pursuit, and whose readiness and sagacity rendered him better adapted for any other than forensic practice, suddenly turned his attention to the medical art. Having never practised medicine, and being totally unacquainted with the nature of remedies—a knowledge only to be acquired by personal examination and actual experience—as a matter of course, he was obliged to renounce all previously-established theories, and to trust rather to his flowing periods and his well-studied discourses, for gaining an influence upon the minds of his audience.

Reducing the whole art of medicine to an estimation solely of primary causes, he made it nothing but a merely conjectural art, and established it as his creed, that there are five great principles of treatment for all diseases in common; diet, use or non-use of wine, frictions, exercise on foot, and exercise [“Gestationes;” exercise on horseback, in a litter, or in a carriage drawn by horses.] in a carriage or on horseback. As every one perceived that each of these methods of treatment lay quite within his own reach, all, of course, with the greatest readiness gave their assent, willing as they were to believe that to be true which was so easy of acquisition; and hence it was that he attracted nearly all the world about him, as though he had been sent among mankind on a special mission from heaven.

### Chap. 8.—The Changes Effected by Asclepiades in the Practice of Medicine.

In addition to this, he had a wonderful tact in gaining the full confidence of his patients: sometimes he would make them a promise of wine, and then seize the opportune moment for administering it, while on other occasions, again, he would prescribe cold water: indeed, as Herophilus, among the ancients, had been the first to enquire into the primary causes of disease, and Cleophantus had brought into notice the treatment of diseases by wine, so did Asclepiades, as we learn from M. Varro, prefer to be indebted for his surname and repute to the extensive use made by him of cold water as a remedy. He employed also various other soothing remedies for his patients; thus, for instance, it was he that introduced swinging beds, the motion of which might either lull the malady, or induce sleep, as deemed desirable. It was he, too, that brought baths into such general use,—a method of treatment that was adopted with the greatest avidity—in addition to numerous other modes of treatment of a pleasant and soothing nature. By these means he acquired a great professional reputation, and a no less extended fame; which was very considerably enhanced by the following incident: meeting the funeral procession of a person unknown to him, he ordered the body to be removed from the funeral pile [See B. vii. c. 37. Apuleius gives the story at considerable length, in the Florida, B. iv.] and carried home, and was thus the means of saving his life. This circumstance I am the more desirous to mention, that it may not be imagined that it was on slight grounds only that so extensive a revolution was effected in the medical art.

There is, however, one thing, and one thing only, at which we have any ground for indignation,—the fact, that a single individual, and he belonging to the most frivolous nation [Asia Minor. Asclepiades was a native of Prusa in Bithynia.] in the world, a man born in utter indigence, should all on a sudden, and that, too, for the sole purpose of increasing his income, give a new code of medical laws to mankind; laws, however, be it remembered, which have been annulled by numerous authorities since his day. The success of Asclepiades was considerably promoted by many of the usages of ancient medicine, repulsive in their nature, and attended with far too much anxiety: thus, for instance, it was the practice to cover up the patient with vast numbers of clothes, and to adopt every possible method of promoting the perspiration; to order the body to be roasted before a fire; or else to be continually sending the patient on a search for sunshine, a thing hardly to be found in a showery climate like that of this city of ours; or rather, so to say, of the whole of Italy, so prolific [We adopt Sillig’s suggestion, and read “nimborum altrice,” the word “imperatrice” being evidently out of place. The climate of Italy seems to have changed very materially since his day.] as it is of fogs and rain. [See B. ii. c. 51.] It was to remedy these inconveniences, that he introduced the use of hanging baths, [See B. ix. c. 79.] an invention that was found grateful to invalids in the very highest degree.

In addition to this, he modified the tortures which had hitherto attended the treatment of certain maladies; as in quinzy for instance, the cure of which before his time had been usually effected by the introduction of an instrument [“Organo.”] into the throat. He condemned, and with good reason, the indiscriminate use of emetics, which till then had been resorted to in a most extraordinary degree. He disapproved also of the practice of administering internally potions that are naturally injurious to the stomach, a thing that may truthfully be pronounced of the greater part of them. Indeed it will be as well to take an early opportunity of stating what are the medicaments which act beneficially upon the stomach.

### Chap. 9. (4.)—Remarks in Dispraise of the Practices of Magic.

But above all things, it was the follies of magic more particularly that contributed so essentially to his success—follies which had been carried to such a pitch as to destroy all confidence in the remedial virtues of plants. Thus, for instance, it was stoutly maintained that by the agency of the plant æthiopis [See B. xxiv. c. 102.] rivers and standing waters could be dried up, and that by the very touch [We agree with Pintianus that the name of some plant here has been lost, the word “condiendis” making no sense.] \* \* \* \* all bars and doors might be opened: that if the plant achæmenis [See B. xxiv. c. 102.] were thrown into the ranks of the enemy it would be certain to create a panic and put them to flight: that latace [Some plant as fictitious as the others here mentioned.] was given by the Persian kings to their ambassadors, to ensure them an abundant supply of everything wherever they might happen to be: with numerous other reveries of a similar nature. Where, I should like to know, were all these plants, when the Cimbri and Teutones brought upon us the horrors of warfare with their terrific yells? or when Lucullus defeated, with a few legions, so many kings who ruled over the Magi? [See B xxx. c. 1.] Why is it too that the Roman generals have always made it their first care in warfare to make provision for the victualling of their troops? And how was it that at Pharsalia the troops of Cæsar were suffering from famine, if an abundance of everything could have been ensured by the fortunate possession of a single plant? Would it not have been better too for Scipio Æmilianus to have opened the gates of Carthage by touching them with a herb, than to have taken so many years to batter down its bulwarks with his engines of war?

Turning to the present moment, let them, by the agency of the herb meroïs, [See B. xxiv. c. 102.] dry up the Pomptine [See B. iii. c. 9.] Marshes, if they can, and by these means restore so much territory to the regions of Italy in the neighbourhood of our city. In the works, too, of Democritus, already mentioned, [In B. xxiv. c. 102.] we find a recipe for the composition of a medicament which will ensure the procreation of issue, both sure to be good and fortunate.—What king of Persia, pray, ever obtained that blessing? It really would be a marvellous fact that human credulity, taking its rise originally in the very soundest of notions, should have ultimately arrived at such a pitch as this, if the mind of man understood, under any circumstances, how to keep within the bounds of moderation; and if the very system of medicine thus introduced by Asclepiades, had not been carried to a greater pitch of extravagance than the follies of magic even, an assertion which I shall prove on a more appropriate occasion. [In B. xxix. c. 5.]

Such, however, is the natural constitution of the human mind, that, be the circumstances what they may, commencing with what is necessary it speedily arrives at the point of launching out in excess.

We will now resume our account of the medicinal properties of the plants mentioned in the preceding Book, adding to our description such others as the necessities of the case may seem to require.

### Chap. 10.—Lichen: Five Remedies.

As to the treatment of lichen, so noisome a disease as it is, we shall here give a number of additional remedies for it, gathered from all quarters, although those already described are by no means few in number. For the cure of lichen plantago is used, pounded, cinquefoil also, root of albucus [See B. xxi. c. 68.] in combination with vinegar, the young shoots of the fig-tree boiled in vinegar, or roots of marsh-mallow boiled down to one-fourth with glue and vinegar. The sores are rubbed also with pumice, and then fomented with root of rumex [See B. xx. c. 85.] bruised in vinegar, or with scum of viscus [“Flos visci.”] kneaded up with lime. A decoction, too, of tithymalos [See c. 39 of this Book.] with resin is highly esteemed for the same purpose.

But to all these remedies the plant known as “lichen,” from its efficacy as a cure, is held in preference. It is found growing among rocks, and has a single broad leaf [Identified by Fée with the Marchantia polymorpha of Linnæus, Common Marchantia, or Fountain liverwort, the male plant.] near the root, and a single long stem, with small leaves hanging from it. This plant has the property also of effacing brand marks, being beaten up with honey for that purpose. There is another kind [Identified by Fée with the Marchantia stellata, Star-headed Marchantia, or Female fountain liverwort. Desfontaines takes it to be either the Marchantia conica, or the Peltidea canina. It must be remembered that the Marchantia is not a Lichen in the modern acceptation of the word, and that our Lichens are destitute of stem. Littré identifies it with the Lecanora parella.] of lichen also, which adheres entirely to rocks, like moss, and which is equally used as a topical application. The juice of it, dropt into wounds, or applied to abscesses, has the property of arresting hæmorrhage: mixed with honey, it is curative of jaundice, the face and tongue being rubbed with it. Under this mode of treatment, the patient is recommended to wash in salt water, to anoint himself with oil of almonds, and to abstain from garden vegetables. For the cure of lichen, root of thapsia [See B. xiii. c. 43.] is also used, bruised in honey.

### Chap. 11.—Quinzy.

For the treatment of quinzy, we find argemonia [See B. xxv. c. 56.] recommended, in wine; a decoction of hyssop, boiled with figs, used as a gargle; peucedanum, [See B. xxv. c. 70.] with an equal proportion of sea-calf’s rennet; proserpinaca, [See B. xxvii. c. 104.] beaten up in the pickle of the mæna [See B. ix. c. 42.] and oil, or else placed beneath the tongue; as also juice of cinquefoil, taken in doses of three cyathi. Used as a gargle, juice of cinquefoil is good for the cure of all affections of the fauces: verbascum, [See B. xxv. c. 73.] too, taken in wine, is particularly useful for diseases of the tonsillary glands.

### Chap. 12. (5.)—Scrofula.

For the cure of scrofula [Fée remarks that none of the plants here mentioned are of any utility for the cure of scrofula.] plantago is employed, chelidonia [See B. xxv. c. 50.] mixed with honey and axle-grease, cinquefoil, and root of persolata [See B. xxv. c. 66.] —this last being applied topically, and covered with the leaf of the plant—artemisia, [See B. xxv. c. 36.] also, and an infusion of the root of mandragora [See B. xxv. c. 94.] in water. The large-leaved sideritis, [See B. xxv. c. 19, where our author has confused the Achillea with the Sideritis; also c. 15, where he describes the Heraclion siderion. Fée identifies the Sideritis mentioned in B. xxv. c. 19, as having a square stem and leaves like those of the quercus, with the Stachys heraclea of modern botany. That mentioned in the same Chapter, as having a fetid smell, he identifies with the Phellandrium mutellina of Linnæus. The large-leaved Sideritis is, no doubt, the one mentioned as having leaves like those of the quereus. See the Note to B. xxv. c. 19.] cleft by the left hand with a nail, is worn attached as an amulet: but after the cure has been effected, due care must be taken to preserve the plant, in order that it may not be set again, to promote the wicked designs of the herbalists and so cause the disease to break out afresh; as sometimes happens in the cases already mentioned, [In B. xxi. c. 83, and B. xxv. c. 119.] and others which I find stated, in reference to persons cured by the agency of artemisia or plantago.

Damasonion, [See B. xxv. c. 77.] also known as alcea, is gathered at the summer solstice, and applied with rain-water, the leaves being beaten up, or the root pounded, with axle-grease, so as to admit, when applied, of being covered with a leaf of the plant. The same plan is adopted also for the cure of all pains in the neck, and tumours on all parts of the body.

### Chap. 13.—The Plant Called Bellis: Two Remedies.

Bellis [Probably the Bellis perennis of Linnæus, the Common daisy. Fée remarks, that it was probably unknown to the Greeks.] is the name of a plant that grows in the fields, with a white flower somewhat inclining to red; if this is applied with artemisia, [See B. xxv. c. 36.] it is said, the remedy is still more efficacious.

### Chap. 14.—The Condurdum.

The condurdum, [Identified by Sprengel and Desfontaines with the Saponaria vaccaria, the Perfoliate soapwort. Other commentators have suggested the Valeriana rubra, but Fée thinks that its synonym has not been hitherto discovered.] too, is a plant with a red blossom, which flowers at the summer solstice. Suspended from the neck, it arrests scrofula, they say: the same being the case also with vervain, in combination with plantago. For the cure of all diseases of the fingers, hangnails in particular, cinquefoil is used.

### Chap. 15.—Cough.

Of all diseases of the chest, cough is the one that is the most oppressive. For the cure of this malady, root of panaces [See B. xxv. c. 11.] in sweet wine is used, and in cases where it is attended with spitting of blood, juice of henbane. Henbane, too, used as a fumigation, is good for cough; and the same with scordotis, [See B. xxv. c. 27.] mixed with nasturtium and dry resin, beaten up with honey: employed by itself also, scordotis facilitates expectoration, a property which is equally possessed by the greater centaury, even where the patient is troubled with spitting of blood; for which last juice of plantago is very beneficial. Betony, taken in doses of three oboli in water, is useful for purulent or bloody expectorations: root also of persolata, [See B. xxv. c. 66.] in doses of one drachma, taken with eleven pine-nuts; and juice of peucedanum. [See B. xxv. c. 70.]

For pains in the chest, acoron [See B. xxv. c. 100.] is remarkably useful; hence it is that it is so much used an ingredient in antidotes. For cough, daucus [See B. xxv. c. 64.] and the plant scythice [See B. xxii. c. 11, and B. xxv. c. 43. Our Liquorice probably, which, Fée remarks, as also figs and hyssop, has maintained its ancient reputation as a pectoral.] are much employed, this last being good, in fact, for all affections of the chest, coughs, and purulent expectorations, taken in doses of three oboli, with the same proportion of raisin wine. The verbascum [See B. xxv. c. 73.] too, with a flower like gold, is similarly employed.

(6.) This last-named plant is so remarkably energetic, that an infusion of it, administered in their drink, will relieve beasts of burden, not only when troubled with cough, but when broken-winded even—a property which I find attributed to gentian also. Root of cacalia [See B. xxv. c. 85.] chewed, or steeped in wine, is good for cough as well as all affections of the throat. Five sprigs of hyssop, with two of rue and three figs, act detergently upon the thoracic organs and allay cough.

### Chap. 16.—Bechion, Otherwise Known as Arcion, Chamæleuce or Tussilago: Three Remedies.

Bechion [See B. xxiv. c. 85.] is known also as tussilago: there are two kinds of it. Wherever it is found growing wild, it is generally thought that there is a spring of water below, and it is looked upon as a sure sign that such is the case, by persons in search [“Aquileges.”] of water. The leaves are somewhat larger than those of ivy, and are some five or seven in number, of a whitish hue beneath, and a pale green on the upper surface. The plant is destitute of stem, blossom, and seed, and the root is very diminutive. Some persons are of opinion that this bechion is identical with the arcion, known also as the “chamæleuce.” [See B. xxiv. c. 85.] The smoke [Dried bechion, or coltsfoot, is still smoked by some persons for affections of the chest.] of this plant in a dry state, inhaled by the aid of a reed and swallowed, is curative, they say, of chronic cough; it is necessary, however, at each inhalation to take a draught of raisin wine.
