---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 10-14."
chapter_order: 20
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 10.—The Third Region of Italy.

At the Silarus begins the third region of Italy, consisting of the territory of Lucania and Bruttium; here too there have been no few changes of the population. These districts have been possessed by tbe Pelasgi, the Œnotrii, the Itali, the Morgetes, the Siculi, and more especially by people who emigrated from Greece [“Græciæ maxime populi.” This may also be rendered “a people who mostly emigrated from Greece,” in reference to the Siculi or Sicilians, but the other is probably the correct translation.], and, last of all, by the Leucani, a people sprung from the Samnites, who took possession under the command of Lucius. We find here the town of Pæstum [A town of Lucania, colonized by the Sybarites about B.C. 524. In the time of Augustus it seems to have been principally famous for the exquisite beauty of its roses. Its ruins are extremely magnificent.], which received from the Greeks the name of Posidonia, the Gulf of Pæstum [Now the Golfo di Salerno.], the town of Elea, now known as Velia [A Greek town founded by the Phocæans. It was the birth-place of the philosophers Parmenides and Zeno, who founded a school of philosophy known as the Eleatic. Castell’ a Mare della Brucca stands on its site.], and the Promontory of Palinurum [Now Capo di Palinuro; said to have received its name from Palinurus, the pilot of Æneas, who fell into the sea there and was murdered by the natives. See Virgil, Æneid, B. vi. l. 381 et seq.], a point at which the land falls inwards and forms a bay [Now the Golfo di Policastro.], the distance across which to the pillar [This tower or column was erected in the vicinity of Rhegium on the Straits of Sicily. It was 100 stadia, or about eight miles, from the town, and at it passengers usually embarked for Sicily. The spot is now called Torre di Carallo.] of Rhegium is 100 miles. Next after Palinurum comes the river Melpes [Now the Faraone.], then the town of Buxentum [A Greek colony. The present Policastro occupies very nearly its site. It seems to have received its name from the cultivation of box trees in its vicinity.], called in [Magna] Græcia Pyxus, and the river Laus; there was formerly a town [Or more properly Laos, originally a Greek colony. In the vicinity is the modern town of Laino, and the river is called the Lao.] also of the same name.

At this spot begins the coast of Bruttium, and we come to the town of Blanda [Ptolemy mentions it as an inland town, and Livy speaks of it as a Lucanian city. It probably stood near the modern Maratea, twelve miles south-east of Policastro.], the river Batum [The modern Bato.], Parthenius, a port of the Phocians, the bay of Vibo [The bay of Bivona, formerly Vibo, the Italian name for the Greek city of Hippo or Hippona. On its site stands the modern Bivona.], the place [“Locus Clampetiæ.” Clampetia or Lampetia stood in the vicinity of the modern Amantia. From other authors we find that it was still existing at this time. If such is the fact, the meaning will be “the place where the former municipal town of Clampetia stood,” it being supposed to have lost in its latter years its municipal privileges.] where Clampetia formerly stood, the town of Temsa [One of the ancient Ausonian towns, and afterwards colonized by the Ætolians. Like its namesake in Cyprus it was famous for its copper. Its site is now occupied by Torre di Lupi.], called Temese by the Greeks, and Terina founded by the people of Crotona [A Greek city, almost totally destroyed by Hannibal; Santa Eufemia occupies its site.], with the extensive Gulf of Terina; more inland, the town of Consentia [One of the cities of the Bruttii; now Cosenza.]. Situate upon a peninsula [The part which now constitutes the Farther Calabria.] is the river Acheron [Supposed to be the same as the Arconte, which falls into the Crathis near Consentia. Nothing is known of the town here alluded to, but it must not be confounded with Acherontia, the modern Acerenza, in Apulia, which was a different place.], from which the people of Acherontia derive the name of their town; then Hippo, now called Vibo Valentia, the Port of Hercules [Supposed to have been the same as the modern port of Tropea.], the river Metaurus [The modern Marro.], the town of Tauroentum [Its ruins are supposed to be those seen near Palmi.], the Port of Orestes, and Medma [Probably the modern Melia stands on its site.]. Next, the town of Scyllæum [A town on the promontory of the same name, now called Scilla or Sciglio, where the monster Scylla was fabled to have dwelt.], the river Cratæis [Homer says (Odyssey, xii. 124), that it had its name from the nymph Cratæis, the mother of Scylla. It is probably the small stream now called Fiume di Solano or dei Pesci.], the mother of Scylla it is said; then the Pillar of Rhegium, the Straits of Sicily, and the two promontories which face each other, Cænys [The modern Capo di Cavallo, according to the older commentators; but more recent geographers think that the Punta del Pezzo was the point so called.] on the Italian, and Pelorus [Now called Capo di Faro, from the lighthouse there erected.] on the Sicilian side, the distance between them being twelve stadia. At a distance thence of twelve miles and a half, we come to Rhegium [Originally a Greek colony; a Roman colony was settled there by Augustus. The modern city of Reggio occupies its site.], after which begins Sila [it extended south of Consentia to the Sicilian Straits, a distance of 700 stadia. It produced the pitch for which Bruttium was so celebrated. Its site still has the name of Sila.], a forest of the Apennines, and then the promontory of Leucopetra [Or White Rock, now Capo dell’ Armi. It forms the extremity of the Apennine Chain.], at a distance of fifteen miles; after which come the Locri [The site of the city of Locri is supposed to have been that of the present Motta di Burzano.], who take their surname from the promontory of Zephyrium [He says that they were called Epizephyrii, from the promontory of Zephyrium, now the Capo di Burzano; but according to others, they had this name only because their colony lay to the west of their native Greece. Strabo says that it was founded by the Locri Ozolæ, and not the Opuntii, as most authors have stated.], being distant from the river Silarus 303 miles.

At this spot ends the first [This expression is explained by a reference to the end of the First Chapter of the present Book.] great Gulf of Europe; the seas in which bear the following names:—That from which it takes its rise is called the Atlantic, by some the Great Atlantic, the entrance of which is, by the Greeks, called Porthmos, by us the Straits of Gades. After its entrance, as far as it washes the coasts of Spain, it is called the Hispanian Sea, though some give it the name of the Iberian or Balearic [Called by some the Canal de Baleares.] Sea. Where it faces the province of Gallia Narbonensis it has the name of the Gallic, and after that, of the Ligurian, Sea. From Liguria to the island of Sicily, it is called the Tuscan Sea, the same which is called by some of the Greeks the Notian [Or Southern Sea.], by others the Tyrrhenian, while many of our people call it the Lower Sea. Beyond Sicily, as far as the country of the Salentini, it is styled by Polybius the Ausonian Sea. Eratosthenes however gives to the whole expanse that lies between the inlet of the ocean and the island of Sardinia, the name of the Sardoan Sea; thence to Sicily, the Tyrrhenian; thence to Crete, the Sicilian; and beyond that island, the Cretan Sea.

### Chap. 11.—Sixty-Four Islands, Among Which Are the Baleares.

The first islands that we meet with in all these seas are the two to which the Greeks have given the name of Pityussæ [The modern Iviza and Formentera.], from the pine-tree [The Greek for which is πίτυς.], which they produce. These islands now bear the name of Ebusus, and form a federate state. They are separated by a narrow strait [Less than two leagues in width.] of the sea, and are forty-six [The real distance is 34 miles from the northern point of Iviza, called Punta de Serra, to the southern point of Formentera, namely—across Iviza 22 miles, across the sea 5, and across Formentera 7.] miles in extent. They are distant from Dianium [Now Denia.] 700 stadia, Dianium being by land the same distance [This is not correct: the distance is but 45 miles.] from New Carthage. At the same distance [This is incorrect: taken at the very greatest, the distance is only 522 stadia, eight to the mile.] from the Pityussæ, lie, in the open sea, the two Baleares, and, over against the river Sucro [The Xucar in Spain.], Colubraria [We more generally find it stated that the isle of Formentera, one of the Pityussæ, was called Colubraria. He probably refers to the islands of the group about twenty leagues from the coast of Spain, now known by the name of Columbrete; but they are not near the Xucar, from which, as well as from the Pityussæ, they are distant about seventy miles. The latter islands are now generally considered as part of the group of the Baleares.]. The Baleares [Now Majorca and Minorca, with the ancient Pityussæ.], so formidable in war with their slingers [They served as mercenaries, first under the Carthaginians and afterwards under the Romans. The ancient writers generally derive the name of the people from their skill as archers— βαλεαρεῖς, from βάλλω, “to throw”; but Strabo assigns to the name a Phœnician origin, as being equivalent to the Greek γυμνῆται, “light-armed soldiers.” It is probably from their light equipment that the Greeks gave to the islands the name of Γυμνησίαι. Livy says that they used to go naked during the summer.], have received from the Greeks the name of Gymnasiæ.

The larger island is 100 [Seventy miles is the real length of Majorca, and the circumference is barely 250 miles.] miles in length, and 475 in circumference. It has the following towns; Palma [Still called Palma. This and Pollentia were Roman colonies settled by Metellus.] and Pollentia [Now Pollenza.], enjoying the rights of Roman citizens, Cinium [Now Sineu on the Borga.] and Tucis, with Latin rights: Bocchorum, a federate town, is no longer in existence. At thirty miles’ distance is the smaller island, 40 miles in length, and 150 [The circumference is about 110 miles, the length 32.] in circumference; it contains the states of Jamnon [Now Ciudadela.], Sanisera, and Magon [Now Port Mahon. The site of Sanisera, which was probably more inland, is unknown.].

In the open sea, at twelve miles’ distance from the larger island, is Capraria [Now Cabrera. The distance is not twelve, but nine miles.] with its treacherous coast, so notorious for its numerous shipwrecks; and, opposite to the city of Palma, are the islands known as the Mænariæ [Now called the Malgrates.], Tiquadra [Now Dragonera.], and Little Hannibalis [Now El Torre.].

The earth of Ebusus has the effect of driving away serpents, while that of Colubraria produces them; hence the latter spot is dangerous to all persons who have not brought with them some of the earth of Ebusus. The Greeks have given it the name of Ophiusa [As already mentioned he seems to confound Formentera, which was called Ophiusa, with the present group of Columbrete, which islands were probably called Colubraria.]. Ebusus too produces no [The former editions mostly omit “nec”; and so make it that Ebusus does produce the rabbits. Certainly, it does seem more likely that he would mention that fact than the absence of it, which even to Pliny could not appear very remarkable.] rabbits to destroy the harvests of the Baleares. There are also about twenty other small islands in this sea, which is full of shoals. Off the coast of Gaul, at the mouth of the Rhodanus, there is Metina [D’Anville thinks that this is Metapina, but D’Astruc thinks that the flat islands, called Les Tignes, are meant.], and near it the island which is known as Blascon [Now called Brescon, near Agde, according to D’Anville.], with the three Stœchades, so called by their neighbours the Massilians [Who were of Greek origin, and so called them, because they stood in a row, στοῖχος.], on account of the regular order in which they are placed; their respective names are Prote [Now called Porqueroles. Prote signifies the first, Mese the middle one, and Hypæa the one below the others.], Mese [Now Port Croz. D’Anville considers that Pliny is mistaken in identifying this island with Pomponiana or Pompeiana, which he considers to be the same with the peninsula now called Calle de Giens, which lies opposite to Porqueroles.], also called Pomponiana, and Hypæa [Now called the Ile du Levant or du Titan. The group is called the Islands of Hières or Calypso.]. After these come Sturium [These are probably the little islands now known as Ratoneau, Pomègue, and If. It has however been suggested that these names belong to the islands of Hières already mentioned in the text, and that Sturium is the present Porquerolles, Phœnice Port-Croz, and Phila, Levant or Titan.], Phœnice, Phila, Lero, and, opposite to Antipolis [Now Antibes, or Antiboul in the Provençal idiom.], Lerina [Now Saint Honorat de Lérins. The island of Lero is the present Sainte Marguerite de Lérins, and is nearer to Antibes than Lerina. The Lerinian monastery was much resorted to in the early ages of Christianity.], where there is a remembrance of a town called Vergoanum having once existed.

### Chap. 12. (6.)—Corsica.

In the Ligurian Sea, but close to the Tuscan, is Corsica, by the Greeks called Cyrnos, extending, from north to south 150 miles, and for the most part 50 miles in breadth, its circumference being 325. It is 62 miles distant from the Vada Volaterrana [In ancient Etruria, now Torre di Vada. The distance is, in reality, about ninety miles.]. It contains thirty-two states, and two colonies, that of Mariana [Mariana was situate in the northern part of the island, and the ruins of Aleria are still to be seen on the banks of the river Tavignano, near the coast.], founded by C. Marius, and that of Aleria, founded by the Dictator Sylla. On this side of it is Oglasa [Probably near the present Monte Cristo.], and, at a distance of less than sixty miles from Corsica, Planaria [He probably means the group of islands called Formicole, which are situate only thirty-three miles from Corsica, and not near sixty.], so called from its appearance, being nearly level with the sea, and consequently treacherous to mariners.

We next have Urgo [Now La Gorgona.], a larger island, and Capraria, which the Greeks have called Ægilion [Both of these names meaning “Goat island.” It is now called Capraia.]; then Igilium [The modern Giglio.] and Dianium [Now Gianuto, opposite Monte Argentaro on the main-land.], which they have also called Artemisia, both of them opposite the coast of Cosa; also Barpana [These are probably the small islands now called Formiete or Formicole di Grossetto, Troja, Palmajola, and Cervoli.], Mænaria, Columbaria, and Venaria. We then come to Ilva [The modern Elba.] with its iron mines, an island 100 miles in circumference, 10 miles distant from Populonium, and called Æthalia by the Greeks: from it the island of Planasia [Now Pianosa.] is distant 28 miles. After these, beyond the mouths of the Tiber, and off the coast of Antium, we come to Astura [Astura still retains its ancient name, Palmaria is the present Palmarola, Sinonia is now Senone, and Pontiæ is the modern Isola di Ponza.], then Palmaria and Sinonia, and, opposite to Formiæ, Pontiæ. In the Gulf of Puteoli are Pandateria [Now Ventotiene.], and Prochyta, so called, not from the nurse of Æneas, but because it has been poured forth [Deriving its name from the Greek word προχυτὸς, meaning “poured forth.”] or detached from Ænaria [The present island of Ischia, off the coasts of Campania. The name of Pithecusæ appears to have been given by the Greeks to the two islands of Ænaria and Prochyta collectively.], an island which received its name from having been the anchorage of the fleet of Æneas, though called by Homer Inarime [Ovid, like many other writers, mentions Inarime as though a different island from Pithecusæ. See Met. B. xiv. l. 89. As is here mentioned by Pliny, many persons derived the name “Pithecusæ” from πίθηκος “an ape,” and, according to Strabo, “Aremus” was the Etrurian name for an ape. Ovid, in the Metamorphoses, loc. cit., confirms this tradition by relating the change of the natives into apes. The solution of its name given by Pliny appears however extremely probable, that it gained its name from its manufacture of πιθηκὰ, or earthen vessels. Virgil is supposed to have coined the name of “Inarime.”]; it is also called Pithecusa, not, as many have fancied, on account of the multitudes of apes found there, but from its extensive manufactories of pottery. Between Pausilipum [Now Posilippo. It is said to have derived its name from the Greek παυσίλυπον, as tending to drive away care by the beauty of its situation. Virgil was buried in its vicinity.] and Neapolis lies the island of Megaris [The modern Castel del’ Ovo.], and then, at a distance of eight miles from Surrentum, Capreæ [Now Capri. Here Tiberius established his den of lustfulness and iniquity. He erected twelve villas in the island, the remains of several of which are still to be seen.], famous for the castle of the emperor Tiberius: it is eleven miles in circumference.

### Chap. 13.—Sardinia.

Leucothea comes next, and after it, but out of sight, as it lies upon the verge of the African Sea, Sardinia. It is situate somewhat less [The distance between is hardly five miles.] than eight miles from the nearest point of Corsica, and the Straits between them are even still more reduced by the small islands there situate, called the Cuniculariæ [These rocks appear at the present day to be nameless. The old name seems to mean, the “Rabbit Warrens.”], as also those of Phintonis [Phintonis, according to Hardouin, is the modern Isola di Figo, according to Mannert, Caprera. Cluver makes Fossæ to be the present Isola Rossa, while Mannert considers it to be the same with Santa Maddalena.] and Fossæ, from which last the Straits themselves have obtained the name of Taphros [Ταφρὸς being the Greek for the Latin word “fossa,” the ordinary meaning of which is an “excavation.”].

(7.) Sardinia extends, upon the east side, a distance of 188 miles, on the west 175, on the south 77, and on the north 125, being 565 miles in circumference. Its promontory of Caralis [Probably the Cape of Carbonara, from which however Africa is distant only 121 miles, and the gulf of Gades or Cadiz 980.] is distant from Africa 200, and from Gades 1400 miles. Off the promontory of Gordis [Now Capo Falcone.] it has two islands called the Isles of Hercules [Now Asinara or Zavara, and Isola Piana.], off that of Sulcis, the island of Enosis [Now called Santo Antiocho, off La Punta dell’ Ulga.], and off that of Caralis, Ficaria [According to Cluver, the modern Coltelalzo.]. Some writers place Beleris not far from it, as also Callodis, and the island known as Heras Lutra [The “Baths of Juno.” The identity of these islands does not appear to have been ascertained.].

The most celebrated peoples of this island are the Ilienses [Said by Pausanias to have been descended from persons who escaped on the fall of Troy under the command of Iolaüs.], the Balari, and the Corsi; and among its eighteen towns, there are those of the Sulcitani [Of the town of Sulcis. Its ruins are probably those seen at the village of Sulci, near the port Palma di Solo.], the Valentini [Their town was probably on the site of the present Iglesias.], the Neapolitani [Their town was probably either the present Napoli or Acqua di Corsari.], the Bosenses [Their town is probably indicated by the ruins on the river Gavino.], the Caralitani [Their town was Caralis, the present Cagliari.], who enjoy the rights of Roman citizens, and the Norenses [Their town was probably Nora, the present Torre Forcadizo.]. There is also one colony which is called Ad Turrim Libysonis [“At Libyso’s Tower.”]. Timæus has called this island Sandaliotis, on account of the similarity of its shape to the sole of a shoe, while Myrtilus has given it the name of Ichnusa [From the Greek ἴχνος, “a footstep.”], from its resemblance to the print of a footstep. Opposite to the Gulf of Pæstum is Leucasia [Now La Licosa, a small rocky island.], so called from a Siren who is buried there; opposite to Velia are Pontia and Isacia, both known by one name, that of Œnotrides, a proof that Italy was formerly possessed by the Œnotrians. Opposite to Vibo are the little islands called Ithacesiæ [Now Torricella, Praca, and Brace, with other rocks.], from the watch-tower of Ulysses situate there.

### Chap. 14. (8.)—Sicily.

But more celebrated than all is Sicily, called Sicania by Thucydides, and by many writers Trinacria or Trinacia, from its triangular appearance. According to Agrippa it is 618 [Posidonius, quoted by Strabo, says 550.] miles in circumference. In former times it was a continuation of the territory of Bruttium, but, in consequence of the overflowing of the sea, became severed from it; thus forming a strait of 15 miles in length, and a mile and a half in width in the vicinity of the Pillar of Rhegium. It was from this circumstance of the land being severed asunder that the Greeks gave the name of Rhegium [Meaning that it comes from the Greek verb ῥηγνύμι, “to break.” This is probably only a fanciful origin of the name.] to the town situate on the Italian shore.

In these Straits is the rock of Scylla, as also Charybdis [The present Garofalo. At the present day small boats approach it without danger.], a whirlpool of the sea, both of them noted for their perils. Of this triangle, the promontory, which, as we have already [In Chap. x. Pelorus is the modern Capo di Faro.] mentioned, is called Pelorus, faces Scylla and juts out towards Italy, while Pachynum [Now Capo di Passaro.] extends in the direction of Greece, Peloponnesus being at a distance from it of 440 miles, and Lilybæum [The present Capo di Boco Marsala.], towards Africa, being distant 180 miles from the promontory of Mercury [Now Cape Bon. The real distance is but seventy-eight miles.], and from that of Caralis in Sardinia 190. These promontories and sides are situate at the following distances from each other: by land it is 186 miles from Pelorus to Pachynum, from Pachynum to Lilybæum 200, and from Lilybæum to Pelorus 170 [The following are more probably the correct distances: 150, 210, and 230 miles.].

In this island there are five colonies and sixty-three cities or states. Leaving Pelorus and facing the Ionian Sea, we have the town of Messana [Now Messina.], whose inhabitants are also called Mamertini and enjoy the rights of Roman citizens; the promontory of Drepanum [The modern Capo di Santo Alessio.], the colony of Tauromenium [Now called Taormini; the remains of the ancient town are very considerable.], formerly called Naxos, the river Asines [Probably the present Alcantara.], and Mount Ætna, wondrous for the flames which it emits by night. Its crater is twenty stadia in circumference, and from it red-hot cinders are thrown as far as Tauromenium and Catina, the noise being heard even at Maroneum [The present Madonia and Monte di Mele.] and the Gemellian Hills. We then come to the three rocks of the Cyclopes [Now called I Fariglioni.], the Port of Ulysses [In modern times called “Lognina Statione,” according to Hardouin.], the colony of Catina [The modern city of Catania stands on its site.], and the rivers Symæthus [The Fiume di Santo Leonardo, according to Hardouin, but Mannert says the river Lentini. Ansart suggests the Guarna Lunga.] and Terias; while more inland lie the Læstrygonian Plains.

To these rivers succeed the towns of Leontinum [Now Lentini. The ruins of Megaris are still to be seen, according to Mannert.] and Megaris, the river Pantagies [Now the Porcaro.], the colony of Syracuse [The modern city of Siracosa.], with the fountain of Arethusa [See B. xxxi. c. 30, for particulars of this fountain.], (the people in the Syracusan territory drink too of the fountains of Temenitis [According to Mirabella, these springs are in modern times called Fonte di Canali, Cefalino, Fontana della Maddalena, Fonte Ciane, and Lampismotta.], Archidemia, Magæa, Cyane, and Milichie,) the port of Naustathmus [The modern Fonte Bianche. The Elorus, according to Hardouin, is the modern Acellaro, according to Mannert, the Abisso.], the river Elorus, and the promontory of Pachynum. This side [The southern side.] of Sicily begins with the river Hirminius [Now the Maulo, or Fiume di Ragusa.], then follow the town of Camarina [Still called Camarina. Scarcely any vestiges of the ancient city now remain.], the river Gelas [According to Hardouin the Fiume Salso; but according to D’Anville and Mannert, the Fiume Ghiozzo.], and the town of Agragas [Now Girgenti. Gigantic remains of the ancient city are still to be seen.], which our people have named Agrigentum. We next come to the colony of Thermæ [See note in this page.], the rivers Achates [The Achates is the modern Belice, the Mazara retains its name, and the Hypsa is now the Marsala.], Mazara, and Hypsa; the town of Selinus [So called by the Greeks from its abundant growth of parsley, called by them σέλινον. Its remains are still to be seen at the spot called Selenti.], and then the Promontory of Lilybæum, which is succeeded by Drepana [Now Trapani. Some vestiges of its ancient mole are to be seen.], Mount Eryx [The present Monte San Juliano.], the towns of Panhormus [The great city of Palermo stands on its site. It was founded by the Phœnicians.], Solus [The modern Solunto.] and Himera [Himera was destroyed by the Carthaginians, B.C. 408, upon which its inhabitants founded Thermæ, so called from its hot springs. This was probably the colony of Thermæ mentioned above by Pliny, though wrongly placed by him on the southern coast between Selinus and Agrigentum. The modern town of Termini stands on the site of Thermæ; remains of its baths and aqueduct are still to be seen. Himera stood on a river of the same name, most probably the present Fiume Grande, and Fazello is of opinion that the town was situate on the site now occupied by the Torre di Bonfornello. Himera was the birth-place of the poet Stesichorus.], with a river of the same name, Cephalœdis [Or Cæphalœdium. Some remains of it are to be seen at the spot called Cefalu.], Aluntium [Probably on the site now occupied by the town of San Marco. Fazello and Cluver however place Aluntium near San Filadelfo, where some ruins were formerly visible, and regard San Marco as the site of Agathyrna or Agathyrnum.], Agathyrnum, the colony of Tyndaris [Probably situate near the church of Santa Maria at Tindari, now the Capo di Mongioio.], the town of Mylæ [Now called Melazzo.], and then Pelorus, the spot at which we began.

In the interior there are the following towns enjoying Latin privileges, those of the Centuripini [Their city was Centuripa, on a hill S.W. of Ætna. The modern Centorbi occupies its site, and some of its ruins may still be seen.], the Netini [Netum probably stood on the spot now known as Noto Anticho.], and the Segestani [The ruins of Segesta are supposed to be those near the river San Bartolomeo, twelve miles south of Alcamo.]; tributary towns are those of the Assorini [Asaro occupies its site.], the Ætnenses [A people dwelling at the foot of Mount Ætna, according to D’Anville, at a place now called Nicolosi.], the Agyrini [The people of Agyrium; the site of which is now called San Filippo d’Argiro. Diodorus Siculus was a native of this place.], the Acestæi, the Acrenses [Acræ occupied a bleak hill in the vicinity of the modern Pallazolo, where its ruins are still to be seen.], the Bidini [Their town was Bidis near Syracuse. The modern Bibino or San Giovanni di Bidini is supposed to stand on its site.], the Cetarini [The people of Cetaria, between Panormus and Drepanum. Its site is unknown.], the Cacyrini [The people of Cacyrum, supposed to have stood on the site of the modern Cassaro. The Drepanitani were so called from living on the promontory of Drepanum.], the Drepanitani, the Ergetini [The ruins near La Cittadella are probably those of Ergetium.], the Echetlienses [The people of Echetla. According to Faziello and Cluver its ruins were those to be seen at the place called Occhiala or Occhula, two miles from the town of Gran Michele.], the Erycini [The inhabitants of the city of Eryx, on the mountain of that name, now San Giuliano. The ancient city stood probably half-way down the mountain.], the Entellini [The town of Entella survived till the thirteenth century, when it was destroyed by the Emperor Frederic II. The ruins were formerly to be seen near Poggio la Reale.], the Enini [Perhaps the people of Enna, once a famous city. According to the story as related by Ovid and Claudian, it was from this spot that Proserpine was carried off by Pluto. It stood on the same site as the town of Castro Giovanni. This note may however be more applicable to the Hennenses, mentioned below.], the Enguini [The ruins of Enguinum are probably those in the vicinity of the modern town of Gangi.], the Gelani [The people of Gela, one of the most important cities of Sicily. Its site was probably the modern Terranova, near the river Fiume di Terranova.], the Galatini [The people probably of Galata or Galaria; on the site of which the modern village of Galata is supposed to stand.], the Halesini [The people probably of Halesa; its ruins are supposed to be those near the village of Tysa, near the river Pettineo.], the Hennenses, the Hyblenses [The people of Hybla. There were three cities of this name in Sicily, the Greater, the Less, and Hybla Megara. The name was probably derived from the local divinity mentioned by Pausanias as being so called.], the Herbitenses [The people of Herbita; the site of which was probably at Nicosia, or else at Sperlinga, two miles south of it.], the Herbessenses [There were two places in Sicily known as Herbessus or Erbessus—one near Agrigentum, the other about sixteen miles from Syracuse, on the site, it is supposed, of the present Pantalica.], the Herbulenses, the Halicyenses [The people of Halicyæ, in the west of Sicily. The modern town of Salemi is supposed to occupy its site.], the Hadranitani [The people of Adranum or Hadranum, a town famous for its temple of the Sicilian deity Adranus. Its site is occupied by the modern town of Aderno. The ruins are very considerable.], the Imacarenses, the Ipanenses, the Ietenses [The people of Ietæ; the site of which town is said by Fazello to be the modern Iato. The sites of the places previously mentioned cannot be identified.], the Mytistratini [The site of their town is situate at the modern Mistretta, where some ruins are still to be seen.], the Magellini, the Murgentini [The site of their town was probably the present village of Mandri Bianchi on the river Dittaino.], the Mutycenses [Probably the people of Motuca, mentioned by Ptolemy, now Modica.], the Menanini [Their town probably stood on the site of the present Mineo.], the Naxii [It has been suggested that these are the same as the people of Tauromenium, said to have been a Naxian colony.], the Noæi [They are supposed to have dwelt on the site of the present Noara.], the Petrini [The ruins of the town of Petra are supposed to have been those to be seen near Castro Novo, according to Mannert.], the Paropini [Fazello is of opinion that the present Colisano occupies the site of the ancient Paropus.], the Phthinthienses [The city of Phthinthias was peopled by the inhabitants of Gela, by command of Phthinthias the despot of Agrigentum. Its ruins are probably those seen in the vicinity of the modern Alicata.], the Semellitani, the Scherini, the Selinuntii [The people of Selinus previously mentioned in p. 218.], the Symæthii, the Talarienses, the Tissinenses [Randazzo, at the foot of Ætna, is supposed to occupy the site of the ancient Tissa.], the Triocalini [The people of Triocala, now Troccoli, near Calata Bellota.], the Tyracinenses, and the Zanclæi [Zancle was the ancient Greek name of Messina, which was so called from its similarity in shape to a sickle. The Messenian colony of the Zanclæi probably dwelt in its vicinity.], a Messenian colony on the Straits of Sicily. Towards Africa, its islands are Gaulos [Gaulos is the present Gozo, and Melita the important island of Malta. The distance here mentioned is in reality only sixty-one miles from Camerina.], Melita, 87 miles from Camerina, and 113 from Lilybæum, Cosyra [Now Pantellaria.], Hieronnesos [The modern island of Maretimo.], Cæne [Probably the present island of Limosa.], Galata [Galata still has the name of Calata, Lopadusa is the present Lampedosa, and Æthusa, according to Mannert, is called Favignana.], Lopadusa, Æthusa, written by some Ægusa, Bucinna [Now Levanzo.], Osteodes [According to Mannert, this is the island Alicur, to the west of the Æolian or Liparian islands. Ustica still retains its ancient name.], distant from Soluntum 75 miles, and, opposite to Paropus, Ustica.

On this side of Sicily, facing the river Metaurus, at a distance of nearly 25 [The least distance between these localities is forty-five miles.] miles from Italy, are the seven [There are now eleven, some of which are supposed to have risen from the sea since the time of Pliny.] islands called the Æolian, as also the Liparæan islands; by the Greeks they are called the Hephæstiades, and by our writers the Vulcanian [From Vulcan the god of fire, the Greek Hephæstus.] Isles; they are called “Æolian” because in the Trojan times Æolus was king there.

(9.) Lipara [Now called the Great Lipara.], with a town whose inhabitants enjoy the rights of Roman citizens, is so called from Liparus, a former king who succeeded [According to Solinus, c. vi., Æolus succeeded him. Its name Melogonis was by some ascribed to its great produce of honey.] Æolus, it having been previously called Melogonis or Meligunis. It is 25 miles [The shortest distance between these localities is forty-six miles.] distant from Italy, and in circumference a little less. Between this island and Sicily we find another, the name of which was formerly Therasia, but now called Hiera, because it is sacred to Vulcan [Now called Volcano.]: it contains a hill which at night vomits forth flames. The third island is Strongyle [Now Strongoli and Stromboli. It is the only one of these mountains that is continually burning. Notwithstanding the dangers of their locality, this island is inhabited by about fifty families.], lying one mile [Strabo makes the same mistake; the distance is twenty miles.] to the east of Lipara, over which Æolus reigned as well; it differs only from Lipara in the superior brilliancy of its flames. From the smoke of this volcano it is said that some of the inhabitants are able to predict three days beforehand what winds are about to blow; hence arose the notion that the winds are governed by Æolus. The fourth of these islands is Didyme [According to Hardouin and D’Anville this is the modern Saline, but Mannert says Panaria. The geographers differ in assigning their ancient names to the other three, except that Euonymos, from its name, the “left-hand” island, is clearly the modern Lisca Bianca.], smaller than Lipara, the fifth Ericusa, the sixth Phœnicusa, left to be a pasture-ground for the cattle of the neighbouring islands, and the last and smallest Euonymos. Thus much as to the first great Gulf of Europe.
