---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 33-38."
chapter_order: 43
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 33.—Troas and the Adjoining Nations.

The first place in Troas is Hamaxitus [On the south-western coast of the Troad, fifty stadia south of Larissa. In the time of Strabo it had ceased to exist. No ruins of this place have been known to be discovered, but Prokesch is induced to think that the architectural remains to be seen near Cape Baba are those of Hamaxitus.], then Cebrenia [Or Cebrene or Cebren. It was separated from the territory of Scepsis by the river Menander. Leake supposes it to have occupied the higher region of Ida on the west, and that its site may have been at a place called Kushunlu Tepe, not far from Baramitsh.], and then Troas [Mentioned in Acts xvi. 8. It is now called Eski Stambul or Old Stambul. It was situate on the coast of Troas, opposite to the south-eastern point of the island of Tenedos, and north of Assus. It was founded by Antigonus, under the name of Antigonia Troas, and peopled with settlers from Scepsis and other neighbouring towns. The ruins of this city are very extensive.] itself, formerly called Antigonia, and now Alexandria, a Roman colony. We then come to the town of Nee [Or Nea, mentioned in B. ii. c..], the Scamander [Now called the Mendereh-Chai.], a navigable river, and the spot where in former times the town of Sigeum [On the north-west promontory of Troas. Here Homer places the Grecian fleet and camp during the Trojan war. The promontory is now called Yenisheri.] stood, upon a promontory. We next come to the Port of the Achæans [Now called Jeni-Scher, according to Ansart. It was at this spot that the Greeks landed in their expedition against Troy.], into which the Xanthus [Usually identified with the Mendereh-Chai or Scamander.] flows after its union with the Simois [The modern Gumbrek.], and forms the Palæscamander [Or “ancient Scamander.”], which was formerly a lake. The other rivers, rendered famous by Homer, namely, the Rhesus, the Heptaporus, the Caresus, and the Rhodius, have left no vestiges of their existence. The Granicus [Now known as the Koja-Chai; memorable as the scene of the three great victories by which Alexander the Great overthrew the Persian empire, B.C. 334. Here also a victory was gained by Lucullus over Mithridates, B.C. 73.], taking a different route, flows into the Propontis [Or Sea of Marmora.]. The small city of Scamandria, however, still exists, and, at a distance of a mile and a half from its harbour, Ilium [It is not exactly known whether New Ilium was built on the same site as the Ilium or Troy which had been destroyed by the Greeks; but it has been considered improbable that the exploits mentioned in the Iliad should have happened in so short a space as that lying between the later Ilium and the coast. The site of New Ilium is generally considered to be the spot covered with ruins, now called Kissarlik, between the villages called Kum-kioi, Kalli-fath, and Tchiblak.], a place exempt from tribute [The Dictator Sylla showed especial favour to Ilium.], the fountain-head of universal fame. Beyond the gulf are the shores of Rhœteum [Now called Cape Intepeh or Barbieri.], peopled by the towns of Rhœteum [The modern Paleo Castro probably occupies its site.], Dardanium [More generally called Dardanus, or Dardanum, said to have been built by Dardanus. It was situate about a mile south of the promontory Dardanis or Dardanium. Its exact site does not appear to bo known: from it the modern Dardanelles are supposed to have derived their name.], and Arisbe [Situate between Percote and Abydus, and founded by Scamandrius and Ascanius the son of Æneas. The village of Moussa is supposed to occupy its site. The army of Alexander mustered here after crossing the Hellespont.]. There was also in former times a town of Achilleon [Alexander the Great visited this place on his Asiatic expedition in B.C. 334, and placed chaplets on the tomb of Achilles.], founded near the tomb of Achilles by the people of Mitylene, and afterwards rebuilt by the Athenians, close to the spot where his fleet had been stationed near Sigeum. There was also the town of Æantion [So called from Æas, the Greek name of Ajax.], founded by the Rhodians upon the opposite point, near the tomb of Ajax, at a distance of thirty stadia from Sigeum, near the spot where his fleet was stationed. Above Æolis and part of Troas, in the interior, is the place called Teuthrania [Teuthrania was in the south-western comer of Mysia, between Temnus and the borders of Lydia, where in very early times Teuthras was said to have founded a Mysian kingdom, which was early subdued by the kings of Lydia: this part was also called Pergamene.], inhabited in ancient times by the Mysians. Here rises the river Caïcus already mentioned. Teuthrania was a powerful nation in itself, even when the whole of Æolis was held by the Mysians. In it are the Pioniæ [Called Pionitæ in the preceding Chapter.], Andera [A town in the Troad, the site of which is unknown.], Cale, Stabulum, Conisium, Teium, Balcea [A town on the Propontis, according to Stephanus. The sites of most of the places here mentioned are utterly unknown.], Tiare, Teuthranie, Sarnaca, Haliserne, Lycide, Parthenium, Thymbre, Oxyopum, Lygdamum, Apollonia, and Pergamum [Also called Pergama or Pergamus. Its ruins are to be seen at the modern Pergamo or Bergamo. It was the capital of the kingdom of Pergamus, and situate in the Teuthranian district of Mysia, on the northern bank of the river Caïcus. Under its kings, its library almost equalled that of Alexandria, and the formation of it gave rise to the invention of parchment, as a writing material, which was thence called Charta Pergamena. This city was an early seat of Christianity, and is one of the seven churches of Asia to whom the Apocalyptic Epistles are addressed. Its ruins are still to be seen.], by far the most famous city in Asia, and through which the river Selinus runs; the Cetius, which rises in Mount Pindasus, flowing before it. Not far from it is Elæa, which we have mentioned [At the beginning of the preceding Chapter.] as situate on the sea-shore. The jurisdiction of this district is called that of Pergamus; to it resort the Thyatireni [The people of Thyatira, mentioned in B. v. c..], the Mosyni, the Mygdones [The people of Mygdonia, a district between Mount Olympus and the coast, in the east of Mysia and the west of Bithynia.], the Bregmeni, the Hierocometæ [“The people of the Holy Village.” Hierocome is mentioned by Livy as situate beyond the river Mæander.], the Perpereni, the Tiareni, the Hierolophienses, the Hermocapelitæ, the Attalenses [The people of Attalia, mentioned in C..], the Panteenses, the Apollonidienses, and some other states unknown to fame. The little town of Dardanum [Previously mentioned in the present Chapter.] is distant from Rhœteum seventy stadia. Eighteen miles thence is the Promontory of Trapeza [Or “the Table.” Now known as Capo de Janisseri.], from which spot the Hellespont first commences its course.

Eratosthenes tells us that in Asia there have perished the nations of the Solymi [Also called the Milyæ, probably of the Syro-Arabian race; they were said to have been the earliest inhabitants of Lycia.], the Leleges [The Leleges are now considered to have been a branch of the great Indo-Germanic race, who gradually became incorporated with the Hellenic race, and thus ceased to exist as an independent people.], the Bebryces [A nation belonging probably more to mythology than history. Strabo supposes them to have been of Thracian origin, and that their first place of settlement was Mysia.], the Colycantii, and the Tripsedri. Isidorus adds to these the Arimi [By some supposed to have been a people of Phrygia.], as also the Capretæ, settled on the spot where Apamea [Mentioned in C. of the present Book.] stands, which was founded by King Seleucus, between Cilicia, Cappadocia, Cataonia, and Armenia, and was at first called Damea [From the Greek δαμάω, “to subdue.” Hardouin thinks that this appellation is intended to be given by Pliny to Asia in general, and not to the city of Apamea in particular, as imagined by Ortelius and others.], from the fact that it had conquered nations most remarkable for their fierceness.

### Chap. 34. (31.)—The Islands Which Lie in Front of Asia.

Of the islands which lie before Asia the first is the one situate in the Canopic Mouth of the Nile, and which received its name, it is said, from Canopus, the pilot of Menelaüs. A second, called Pharos, is joined by a bridge to Alexandria, and was made a colony by the Dictator Cæsar. In former times it was one day’s sail [It is so described by Homer.] from the mainland of Egypt; at the present day it directs ships in their course by means of the fires which are lighted at night on the tower [This was the light-house built upon it by Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, whence the name of pharus came to be applied to similar structures. It was here also that, according to the common story, the seventy Translators of the Greek version of the Old Testament, hence called the Septuagint, were confined while completing their work.] there; for in consequence of the insidious nature of the shoals, there are only three channels by which Alexandria can be approached, those of Steganus [The narrow or fortified channel.], Posideum [The Neptunian channel.] and Taurus.

In the Phœnician Sea, before Joppe there is the island of Paria [Mentioned also in C. of the present Book.], the whole of it forming a town. Here, they say, Andromeda was exposed to the monster: the island also of Arados, already mentioned [In C. of the present Book.], between which and the continent, as we learn from Mucianus, at a depth of fifty cubits in the sea, fresh water is brought up from a spring at the very bottom by means of leather pipes [The boatmen of Ruad, the ancient Aradus, still draw fresh water from the spring Ain Ibrahim, in the sea, a few rods from the shore of the opposite coast.].

### Chap. 35.—Cyprus.

The Pamphylian Sea contains some islands of little note. The Cilician, besides four others of very considerable size, has Cyprus [Now called Kibris.], which lies opposite to the shores of Cilicia and Syria, running east and west; in former times it was the seat of nine kingdoms. Timosthenes states that the circumference of this island is 427 miles, Isidorus [Strabo makes it 425. Hardouin remarks that Isidorus has not made allowance for the margin of the creeks and bays.] 375; its length, between the two Promontories of Dinæ [The north-eastern extremity of Cyprus. It is now called Capo Sant Andreas. It is more generally known in the editions of Pliny by the name of Dinaretum.] and Acamas [Now called Capo Sant Epifanio, or Pifano, after the celebrated metropolitan of Cyprus. It is the western extremity of the island.] lying on the west, is, according to Artemidorus, 160 1 / 2 miles, according to Timosthenes, 200. Philonides says that it was formerly called Acamantis, Xenagoras that it had the names of Cerastis [From the Greek κέρας, “a horn.” It was not improbably so called from the numerous horns or promontories on its coast.], Aspelia, Amathusia, and Macaria [From the Greek μακάριος, “blessed,” in compliment to its fertile soil and delightful temperature.], while Astynomus gives it the names of Cryptos [Apparently from the Greek κρυπτὸς, “concealed.” Stephanus Byzantinus says that it was so called because it was frequently hidden beneath the surface of the sea.] and Colinia. Its towns are fifteen in number, Neapaphos [Or New Paphos. The spot is still called Bafa or Bafo.], Palæpaphos [Or Old Paphos, now Kukala or Konuklia. Old Paphos was situate near the promontory Zephyrium on the river Bocarno, where it had a good harbour; while New Paphos lay more inland, in the midst of a fertile plain, sixty stadia from the former. Old Paphos was the chief seat of worship of Aphrodite or Venus, who was said to have landed at that place after her ascent from the sea.], Curias [Situate on the most southerly point in the island; now Capo Gavatta or delle Gatte.], Citium [A town situate on the south coast of Cyprus. Its ruins are to be seen between Larnika and the port now known as Salines; they are very extensive. In B. xxx. c. 9, Pliny speaks of the salt lakes near this place, which are worked at the present day.], Corineum, Salamis [In the middle of the east coast. It was said to have been founded by Teucer the son of Telamon, who gave it the name of his native land from which he had been banished by his father.], Amathus [Now called Old Limasol, a town on the south coast, celebrated for its worship of Aphrodite or Venus. It was a Phœnician settlement, and Stephanus calls it the most ancient city in the island. It long preserved its oriental customs, and here the Tyrian Hercules was worshipped under his name of Melkart.], Lapethos [Its site is now called Lapitho or Lapta.], Solœ, Tamasos [Probably the same as the Temese of Homer. It was situate in a fertile district in the middle of Cyprus, and in the neighbourhood of extensive copper mines. Near it was a celebrated plain, sacred to Venus, mentioned by Ovid.], Epidarum, Chytri [Now called Chytria, a town of Cyprus on the road from Cerinea to Salamis.], Arsinoë [In the east of Cyprus, near the Promontory of Acamas, formerly called Marion. Ptolemy Soter destroyed this town, and removed the inhabitants to Paphos. The modern name of its site is Polikrusoko or Crisophou, from the gold mines in the neighbourhood. There was more than one city of this name in Cyprus, which was probably bestowed on them during its subjection to the princes of the line of Lagus. Another Arsinoë is placed near Ammochostus to the north of the island, and a third of the same name appears in Strabo with a harbour, temple and grove, between Old and New Paphos.], Carpasium [Or Carpasia, to the north-east of the island, facing the Promontory of Sarpedon on the Cilician coast. It was said to have been founded by Pygmalion, king of Tyre. Pococke speaks of remains at Carpas, the site of this place, especially a long wall and a pier.], and Golgi [Or Golgos, famous for the worship of Aphrodite or Venus, which had existed here even before its introduction at Paphos by Agapenor. Its position is unknown.]. The towns of Cinyria, Marium, and Idalium [Or Idalia, adjoining to which was a forest sacred to Aphrodite. The poets, who connect this place with her worship, give us no indications whatever of its precise locality. Engel identifies it with the modern Dalin, situate to the south of Leucosia, at the foot of Mount Olympus.] are no longer in existence. It is distant from Anemurium [Now Cape Anamur.] in Cilicia fifty miles; the sea which runs between the two shores being called the Channel of Cilicia [“Aulon Cilicium,” now the Sea of Caramania or Cyprus.]. In the same locality [The Cilician Sea, namely.] is the island of Eleusa [There were several islands of this name. It is not improbable that Pliny alludes to the one lying off the coast of Caria between the isle of Rhodes and the mainland, and which seems to be the island marked Alessa in the maps. There was another of the same name close to the shore of Cilicia, afterwards known by the name of Sebaste.], and the four islands known as the Clides [Or Cleides, meaning the “Keys.” This was a group of small islands lying to the north-east of Cyprus. The name of the islands was afterwards transferred by some geographer to the Cape which Pliny above calls Dinæ, and others Dinaretum.], lying before the promontory which faces Syria; and again at the end of the other cape [Cape Acamas, now Pifano.] is Stiria: over against Neapaphos is Hierocepia [Or the “Sacred Garden.” The names of this and the Salaminiæ do not appear to be known to the modern geographers.], and opposite to Salamis are the Salaminiæ.

In the Lycian Sea are the islands of Illyris, Telendos, and Attelebussa [This is identified by Beaufort with the islet called Bœshat, which is separated by a narrow channel from the Lycian shore. The others do not seem to have been identified. Attelebussa is supposed to take its name from a kind of destructive grasshopper without wings, called by the Greeks ἀττέλεβος.], the three barren isles called Cypriæ, and Dionysia, formerly called Caretha. Opposite to the Promontory of Taurus are the Chelidoniæ [Situate off the commencement of the sea-coast of Pamphylia, on the borders of Lycia. Beaufort speaks of them as five in number; he did not meet with any of the dangers of the navigation here mentioned by Pliny. The Greeks still call them Chelidoniæ, and the Italian sailors Celidoni, which the Turks have corrupted into Shelidan.], as many in number, and extremely dangerous to mariners. Further on we find Leucolla with its town, the Pactyæ [Hardouin supposes these four islands to be the names of the group forming the Pactyæ. The names given appear to signify, the “Wild” or “Rough Islands,” the “Isle of the Nymphs,” the “Long Island,” and the “Greatest Island.” They were off the coast of Lycia, and seem to have belonged to the Rhodians. The modern name of Megista is Kastelorizo, according to Ansart.], Lasia, Nymphäis, Macris, and Megista, the city on which last no longer exists. After these there are many that are not worthy of notice. Opposite, however, to Cape Chimæra is Dolichiste [Or Doliche, the “Long Island,” in the Lycian Sea, west of the ruins of Myra. Its modern name is Kakava. It is now uninhabited.], Chœrogylion, Crambussa [Still known as Grambousa, a small island off the east coast of Lycia. There seems to have been another of the same name off the Lycian coast.], Rhoge [An island off the coast of Lycia.], Enagora, eight miles in circumference, the two islands of Dædala [Hardouin thinks that they were opposite to the city of Dædala on the coast of Caria.], the three of Crya [Off the city of Crya, probably, in Caria.], Strongyle, and over against Sidyma [On the coast of Lycia.] the isle of Antiochus. Towards the mouth of the river Glaucus [In Lycia. See C. of the present Book.], there are Lagussa [Probably so called from the number of hares found there.], Macris, Didymæ, Helbo, Scope, Aspis, Telandria, the town of which no longer exists, and, in the vicinity of Caunus [On the coast of Caria.], Rhodussa.

### Chap. 36.—Rhodes.

But the fairest of them all is the free island of Rhodes, 125, or, if we would rather believe Isidorus, 103 miles in circumference. It contains the inhabited cities of Lindos, Camirus [Still known as Lindo and Camiro, according to D’Anville.], and Ialysus [One of the three ancient Doric cities of Rhodes. It lay three-quarters of a mile to the south-west of the city of Rhodes, with which Pliny seems here to confound it. Its site is occupied by a village which still bears the name of Ialiso, and where a few ancient remains are to be found.], now called Rhodos. It is distant from Alexandria in Egypt, according to Isidorus, 583 miles; but, according to Eratosthenes, 469. Mucianus says, that its distance from Cyprus is 166. This island was formerly called Ophiussa [From its productiveness of serpents.], Asteria [Either from Asterius, its former king, or from its being a “constellation” of the sea.], Æthria [Probably because of the clearness and serenity of its atmosphere. See B. ii. c..], Trinacrie [From its three-cornered shape.], Corymbia [Perhaps so called from its fruitfulness in ivy, in Greek κορυμβήθρα, or else from κόρυμβος, “a summit,” from its elevated position.], Pœeëssa [From its verdant and grassy soil.], Atabyria [Either from King Atabyrius, or the mountain Atabyrion; or else from the temple of Jupiter Tabyrius, which Appian speaks of as situate in this island.], from the name of one of its kings; and, in later times, Macaria [The “fortunate,” or “blessed” island.] and Oloessa [“Venomous,” or “deadly.” This name it most probably had in early times (and not more recently, as Pliny says), when it was covered with dense forests, the retreats of serpents and noxious reptiles.]. The islands of the Rhodians are Carpathus [Now known as Skarpanto.], which has given its name to the surrounding sea; Casos [Mentioned by Homer, Il. ii. 676. See also B. iv. c. of the present work. It is described by Ross as a single ridge of mountains, of considerable height.], formerly known as Achne [Signifying “sea-foam.”]; Nisyros [Still known as Nicero.], twelve miles distant from Cnidos, and formerly called Porphyris [From its production of the ‘murex,’ or ‘purple.’]; and, in the same vicinity, midway between Rhodes and Cnidos, Syme [Now called Symi, a small island off the south-west coast of Caria, at the mouth of the Gulf of Doris, to the west of the Promontory of Cynossema.]. This island is thirty-seven miles and a half in circumference, and welcomes us with eight fine harbours. Besides these islands, there are, in the vicinity of Rhodes, those of Cyclopis, Teganon, Cordylussa [Now called the Island of St. Catherine, according to Ansart.], the four islands called Diabetæ [Stephanus Byzantinus mentions these islands as lying in the vicinity at Syme. Perhaps they are the group lying to the south of it, now called Siskle.], Hymos, Chalce [Distant about fifty miles from Carpathus, or Skarpanto. It was probably subject to Rhodes, in the vicinity of which it was situate. Its present name is Chalki.], with its city of that name, Seutlussa [An island, according to Hardouin, not far from Halicarnassus, on the coast of Ionia.], Narthecussa [So called from its productiveness of the νάρθηξ, or ferula.], Dimastos, Progne; and, off Cnidos, Cisserussa, Therionarce, and Calydne [More probably Calydnæ, because there were several islands forming the group, of which Calymna was the chief. See B. iv. c., where Pliny mentions only one town, that of Coös. There are some remains of the ancient towns still to be seen.], with the three towns of Notium, Nisyros, and Mendeterus. In Arconnesus [A small island of Caria, south of Halicarnassus. It is now called Orak-Ada.] there is the town of Ceramus. Off the coast of Caria, there are the islands known as the Argiæ, twenty in number; also Hyetussa [Probably so called from the almost continual rains there.], Lepsia, and Leros.

The most noted island, however, in this gulf is that of Cos [Now called Stanko, or Stanchio, a corruption of ἐς τὰν Κῶ.], fifteen miles distant from Halicarnassus, and 100 in circumference, according to the opinion of many writers. It was formerly called Merope; according to Staphylus, Cea; Meropis, as Dionysius tells us; and, after that, Nymphæa. In this island there is Mount Prion. Nisyros [Which has been previously mentioned in this Chapter.], formerly called Porphyris, is supposed to have been severed from the island of Cos. We next come to the island of Caryanda [In C., Pliny has mentioned a Caryanda on the mainland. It is probable that there was a town on the mainland and another in the island of the same name. Leake says, that there can be little doubt that the large peninsula, towards the west end of which is the fine harbour called by the Turks Pasha Limani, is the ancient island of Caryanda, now joined to the mainland by a narrow sandy isthmus.], with a city of that name, and that of Pidosus [The island of Hyali, near the harbour of Meffi, on the coast of Caria, according to Dupinet.], not far from Halicarnassus. In the Gulf of Ceramicus we also find Priaponnesos [Probably so called from the worship of the god Priapus there.], Hipponnesos, Psyra, Mya, Lampsa, Æmyndus, Passala, Crusa, Pinnicussa, Sepiussa [Few, if any, of these islets can now be recognized. Sepiussa was probably so called from the abundance of the sepia, or cuttle-fish, there.], and Melano. At a short distance from the mainland is an island which bears the name of Cinædopolis, from the circumstance that King Alexander left behind there certain persons of a most disgraceful character.

### Chap. 37.—Samos.

The coast of Ionia has the islands of Trageæ, Corseæ [Over against the isle of Samos.], and Icaros, which has been previously [B. iv. c..] mentioned; Lade [Near the city of Miletus.], formerly called Late; and, among others of no note, the two Camelidæ [So called from their resemblance to camels.], in the vicinity of Miletus; and the three Trogiliæ [Lying before the Promontory of Trogilium, mentioned in C..], near Mycale, consisting of Philion, Argennon, and Sandalion. There is Samos also, a free [Augustus gave their liberty to the Samians. The island is still called by the Greeks Samo, and by the Turks Susam Adassi.] island, eighty-seven miles in circumference, or, according to Isidorus, 100. Aristotle tells us, that it was at first called Parthenia [The “Virgin’s Island,” if so called after Juno, as some say; but according to Strabo, it received its name from the river Parthenius.], after that Dryussa [From its numerous oaks.], and then Anthemussa [From the abundance of its flowers.]. To these names Aristocritus has added Melamphyllus [“Of dark,” or “black foliage;” in allusion probably to its cypresses.] and Cyparissia [“Cypress-bearing.”]: other writers, again, call it Parthenoarussa [This is not improbably a compound, formed by a mistake of the copyists, of the two names, Parthenia and Aryusa, mentioned by Heraclides.] and Stephane [“The Crown.” This island was the birth-place of Pythagoras.]. The rivers of this island are the Imbrasus, the Chesius, and the Ibettes. There are also the fountains of Gigartho and Leucothea; and Mount Cercetius. In the vicinity of Samos are the islands of Rhypara, Nymphæa, and Achillea.

### Chap. 38.—Chios.

At a distance of ninety-four miles from Samos is the free island of Chios [Now known as Khio, Scio, Saka Adassi, or Saksadasi. Chios was declared free by the Dictator Sulla.], its equal in fame, with a town of the same name. Ephorus says, that the ancient name of this island was Æthalia; Metrodorus and Cleobulus tell us, that it had the name of Chia from the nymph Chione; others again say, that it was so called from the word signifying snow [Χιὼν, gen. Χιόνος.]; it was also called Macris and Pityusa [Macris, from its length, and Pityusa, from its pine-trees.]. It has a mountain called Pelennæus; and the Chian marble is well known. It is 125 [Dalechamps says 112 is the correct measurement.] miles in circumference, according to the ancient writers; Isidorus however makes it nine more. It is situate between Samos and Lesbos, and, for the most part, lies opposite to Erythræ [Mentioned in C. of the present Book.].

The adjacent islands, are Thallusa [Meaning “green and flourishing.”], by some writers called Daphnusa [“Productive of laurels.” None of these islets appear to have been recognized by their modern names.], Œnussa, Elaphitis, Euryanassa, and Arginusa, with a town of that name. All these islands are in the vicinity of Ephesus, as also those called the Islands of Pisistratus, Anthinæ, Myonnesos, Diarreusa,—in both of these last there were cities, now no longer in existence,—Poroselene [By Strabo called Pordoselene. He says that the islands in its vicinity were forty in number; of which Pliny here gives the names of two-and-twenty.], with a city of that name, Cerciæ, Halone [South of Proconnesus; now called Aloni.], Commone, Illetia, Lepria and Rhesperia, Procusæ, Bolbulæ, Phanæ, Priapos, Syce, Melane, Ænare, Sidusa, Pele, Drymusa [Near the city of Clazomenæ. It is now called Vourla, according to Ansart.], Anhydros, Scopelos [Now Koutali, according to Ansart.], Sycussa, Marathussa, Psile, Perirreusa, and many others of no note. In the main sea lies the celebrated island of Teos, with a city [We learn from Strabo and other writers, that this city was on a peninsula, and that it stood on the southern side of the isthmus, connecting Mount Mimas with the mainland of Lydia. It was the birth-place of Anacreon and Hecatæus.] of that name, seventy-one miles and a half distant from Chios, and the same from the Erythræ.

In the vicinity of Smyrna are the Peristerides [Or the “Dove Islands;” probably from the multitude of those birds found on those islands.], Carteria, Alopece, Elæussa, Bachina, Pystira, Crommyonnesos, and Megale [Now called Antigona, according to Ansart.]. Facing Troas there are the Ascaniæ, and the three islands called Plateæ. We find also the Lamiæ, the two islands called Plitaniæ, Plate, Scopelos, Getone, Arthedon, Cœlæ, Lagussæ, and Didymæ.
