---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 8-14."
chapter_order: 26
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 8.—Laconia.

At Tænarum begins the territory of Laconia, inhabited by a free nation, and situate on a gulf 106 miles in circuit, and 38 across. The towns are, Tænarum [Or Tænarus, afterwards called Cænopolis. The present town of Kisternes, or Kimaros, occupies its site.], Amyclæ [Its site is generally placed at Sklavokhori, six miles from Sparta; but Leake supposes it to have been situate on the hill called Aghia Kyriaki, between that place and Sparta.], Pheræ [Or Pharis. The present Chitries occupies its site.], and Leuctra [Or Leuctrum, on the river Pamisus, now called Levtros. It must not be confounded with the town in Bœotia where the Thebans defeated the Spartans, B.C. 371.]; and, in the interior, Sparta [Or Lacedæmon. Its site is occupied by the modern villages of Magula and Psykhiko. The principal modern town in the vicinity is Mistra.], Theramne [Or Therapnæ, on the left bank of the Eurotas. Some ruins of it are still to be seen.], and the spots where Cardamyle [Considerable ruins of it are still to be seen to the N.E. of the modern town of Skarhamula.], Pitane [Authors are not agreed as to the site of this town and that of Anthea or Anthene.], and Anthea formerly stood; the former site of Thyrea [Memorable for the pitched battle between 300 Argives and 300 Spartans,—Othryades being the sole survivor of the Spartans, and Alcenor and Chromius of the Argives.], and Gerania [By Homer called Enope.]. Here is also Mount Taygetus [Pente Dactylon, or Pente Dactyli, the “Five Fingers,” is the present name of the range of Taygetus. Its principal summits are now St. Elias and Paixamadhi. The river Eurotas is now called Iris and Niris in its upper and middle course, and Basili-potamo from the Spartan plain to the sea.], the river Eurotas, the Gulf of Ægilodes [Ægila, according to Leake, occupied the site of the present Scutari; if so, this gulf was probably the Gulf of Scutari. Psamathus was near the point of Tænarum.], the town of Psamathus, the Gulf of Gytheum [Or Gythium, near the mouth of the Eurotas. It was famous for its cheeses. The ruins are called Paleopoli, a little to the north of Marathonisi.], so called from the town of that name, from which place the passage is the safest across to the island of Crete. All these places are bounded by the Promontory of Malea [Now Capo Santo Angelo.].

### Chap. 9.—Argolis.

The next gulf, which extends as far as Scyllæum [Now Capo Skillo.], is called the Argolic Gulf, being fifty miles across, and 162 in circuit. The towns upon it are, Bœa [Or Bœæ. Its ruins are to be seen at the head of the Gulf of Vatika.], Epidaurus [It stood on the site of the place called Palæ-Emvasia, above Monembasia.], surnamed Limera, Zarax [Its site is the modern Porto Kari, according to Ansart.], and the port of Cyphanta [Leake places Cyphanta either at Cyparissi, or farther north, at Lenidhi. Ansart makes it the modern Porto Botte, or Stilo.]. The rivers are the Inachus [Now the Banitza. The Erasinus is the modern Kephalari.] and the Erasinus, between which lies Argos, surnamed Hippium [So called from its breed of horses. It is now also called Argos; three leagues from Napoli di Romania.], situate beyond the place called Lerna [Its site is now called Milos. In the marshes in its vicinity Hercules was said to have killed the Lernæan Hydra.], and at a distance of two miles from the sea. Nine miles farther is Mycenæ [Karvata is the name of the place on its site. Its ruins are numerous, and of great magnificence.], and the place where, it is said, Tiryns [Its ruins are of the most interesting nature, presenting enormous masses of stone, of Cyclopian architecture. The spot is at the present day called Palæ-Nauplia.] stood; the site, too, of Mantinea [It must not be confounded with the place in Arcadia, where Epaminondas fell. Its site appears to be unknown.]. The mountains are, Artemius, Apesantus [Or Apesas, in the territory of Cleonæ, now called Fuka. Artemius is probably the present Malvouni, or Malcyo.], Asterion [A river of the same name rose in this mountain; its identity is unknown.], Parparus, and some others, eleven in number. The fountains are those of Niobe [So called from Niobe, the sister of Pelops and wife of Amphion, king of Thebes. The spring of Amymone ran into the lake of Lerna.], Amymone, and Psamathe.

From Scyllæum to the Isthmus of Corinth is a distance of 177 miles. We find here the towns of Hermione [Its ruins are to be seen in the vicinity of the modern village of Castri: they are very extensive.], Trœzen [The modern Dhamala occupies the site of Trœzen.], Coryphasium [The identity of this Coryphasium seems to be unascertained. There was a promontory of that name in Messenia; but it cannot be the place here spoken of.], and Argos, sometimes called “Inachian,” sometimes “Dipsian” [It is supposed that Pliny here alludes to Argos Hippium, which he has previously mentioned; but only in connection with the rivers Inachus and Erasinus, and not as included in the list of the towns of Argolis. The origin of the term “Dipsian” is probably unknown. It could hardly allude to drought, as Argos was abundantly supplied with water. But see B. vii. c. 57.] Argos. Then comes the port of Schœnites [Ansart says that this is the modern Porto Estremo, at the mouth of the Saronic Gulf.], and the Saronic Gulf, which was formerly encircled with a grove of oaks [Hesychius says that oaks were called σαρωνιδὲς in the language of ancient Greece. This gulf is now called the Gulf of Egina, or of Athens.], from which it derives its present name, oaks in ancient Greece having been so called. Upon this gulf is the town of Epidaurus, famous for its temple of Æsculapius [He was worshipped here under the form of a serpent; and his temple, five miles from Epidaurus, was resorted to by patients from all parts of Greece for the cure of their diseases. The ruins of this temple are still to be seen, and those of the theatre at Epidaurus are very extensive. The village of Pidharvo stands in the midst of the ruins.], the Promontory of Spiræum [The modern Capo Franco.], the port of Anthedus [Lapie takes Anthedus, or Anthedon, to be the place now called Porto d’Athene.], Bucephalus [This appears to have been a port of Corinth, on a promontory of the same name, meaning, probably from its shape, the “Bull’s Head Point.”], and then Cenchreæ, previously mentioned, on this side of the Isthmus, with its temple of Neptune [Called the ‘Posideium’; in its vicinity the games were celebrated. The Isthmian Sanctuary was especially famous as a place of refuge.], famous for the games celebrated there every five years. So many are the gulfs which penetrate the shores of the Peloponnesus, so many the seas which howl around it. Invaded by the Ionian on the north, it is beaten by the Sicilian on the west, buffeted by the Cretan on the south, by the Ægean on the S.E., and by the Myrtoan on the N.E.; which last sea begins at the Gulf of Megara, and washes all the coast of Attica.

### Chap. 10. (6.)—Arcadia.

Its interior is occupied for the greater part by Arcadia, which, remote from the sea on every side, was originally called Drymodes [From δρυμωδὴς, “woody,” it being filled with groves and forests.], and at a later period Pelasgis. The cities of Arcadia are, Psophis [Now called the Khan of Tripotamo.], Mantinea [Now called Paleopoli. Here Epaminondas fell, fighting against the Spartans, B.C. 362.], Stymphalus [In the N.E. of Arcadia. Its ruins are supposed to be those seen near the modern Chionia. It was in the vicinity of the lake of the same name, the scene of one of the labours of Hercules.], Tegea [An important city: the modern Piali marks its site.], Antigonea [Built upon the ruins of the ancient Mantinea.], Orchomenus [An ancient town mentioned by Homer, N.W. of Mantinea. The modern Kalpaki stands on its site.], Pheneum [Or Pheneus, on the N.W. of Arcadia. Phonia stands on its site.], Palantium [Near Tegea; said to have been the birth-place of Evander. On the foundation of Megalopolis, it was nearly deserted, but was restored by Antoninus Pius. Its ruins are supposed to be those seen near the modern village of Thana, according to Ansart.] (from which the Palatium [It being said to have been so called in compliment to Evander, a native, as above stated, of Palantium.] at Rome derives its name), Megalopolis [Founded by the advice of Epaminondas, after the battle of Leuctra, B.C. 371, near the frontiers of Messenia. The ruins of its theatre, once the largest in Greece, are the only remains of it now to be seen, near the modern village of Sinano.], Gortyna [It contained a famous temple of Æsculapius. Its ruins are to be seen near the village of Atzikolo. The exact site of Bucolion, which was near Megalopolis, is probably unknown, though Ansart says that the spot is called Troupiais. Of Carnion nothing is known.], Bucolium, Carnion, Parrhasia [The town of Parrhasia, which is mentioned by Homer, seems to have given name to the Parrhasian district. Leake thinks it to be the same as Lycosura.], Thelpusa [On the river Ladon: its ruins are seen near the modern Vanena.], Melænæ [In the west of Arcadia, on the river Alpheus.], Heræa [Or “Juno’s Town.” It was a place of great importance, situate on the lower Alpheus. Its remains are to be seen on a hill west of the village of Aianni, or St. John. They are very inconsiderable. Its wine was highly esteemed, and still maintains its ancient celebrity.], Pylæ [Of Pylæ, Pallene, Agræ, and Epium, nothing appears to be known.], Pallene, Agræ, Epium, Cynæthæ [Or Cynætha, in the north of Arcadia, upon the Aroanian mountains, beyond the natural boundaries of Arcadia. The modern village of Kalavryta occupies its site; but there are scarcely any traces of its remains.], Lepreon of Arcadia [Or Lepreum, so called to distinguish it from Lepreum in Elis.], Parthenium [Nothing seems to be known of this Parthenium. Alea lay between Orchomenus and Stymphalus. Its ruins have been discovered in the dark valley of Skotini, a mile to the N.E. of the village of Buyati.], Alea, Methydrium [Its site has the modern name of Palæopyrgos. The sites of Enispe, mentioned by Homer, and Macistum, are unknown.], Enispe, Macistum, Lampia, Clitorium [Or Cleitor, a famous town of Arcadia. Its ruins are to be seen on the plain of Kalzana, or Katzanes. One of the rivulets that ran past it still retains the name of Clitora.], and Cleonæ [Its ruins, few in number, but testifying its importance, are found near the modern village of Kleves, not far from Kurtesi. The Nemean games were celebrated in honour of Hercules in the grove of Nemea, between Cleonæ and Phlius.]; between which two last towns is the district of Nemea, commonly known as Bembinadia [From the village of Bembina there, mentioned by Strabo, and on which Koutzomati probably now stands.].

The mountains of Arcadia are, Pholoë [Now called Olono. It received its name from the Centaur Pholus, accidentally slain by one of the poisoned arrows of Hercules.], with a town of the same name, Cyllene [The modern Zyria.], Lycæus [Nomiai and Hellenitza are modern names given to this mountain.], upon which is the temple of Lycæan Jupiter; Mænalus [In the south of Arcadia. It is now called Roïnon.], Artemisius [Or Artemisium, forming the boundary between Argolis and Arcadia. It is now called Turniki.], Parthenius [The pass by this mountain from Argolis to Tegea is still called Partheni.], Lampeus [Now called Zembi, according to Ansart.], and Nonacris [The town of Nonacris stood at its foot. The river Styx took its rise in these mountains.], besides eight others of no note. The rivers are the Ladon [Now called the Landona.], which rises in the marshes of Pheneus [The town now called Fonia, already mentioned by Pliny. The waters of its marshes were discharged by a subterranean passage, said to have been made by Hercules.], and the Erymanthus [Now called the Dogana. The two principal heights of Mount Erymanthus are Olonos and Kalefoni.], which springs from a mountain of the same name, and flows into the Alpheus.

The other cities of Achaia worthy of mention are those of the Aliphiræi [The people of Aliphira, a town of Arcadia, in the district of Cynura. Considerable remains of it are still to be seen on the hill of Nerovitza.], the Abeatæ [The people of Abea, in Messenia.], the Pyrgenses [The people of Pyrgos, in Arcadia.], the Paroreatæ [The people of Paroræa, in Arcadia. Of the two next, nothing appears to be known.], the Paragenitæ, the Tortuni, the Typanei [The inhabitants of Typaneæ, in Elis.], the Thriasii [The people of Thrius, in Elis, near Patræ.], and the Tritienses [The people of Tritia, in Achaia, now Chalanthistra.]. Domitius Nero [the emperor] granted liberty to the whole of Achaia [Nero abolished the institutions of the Roman province of Achaia, which had been assigned to the Roman senate, and governed by a proconsul, granting it its liberty. Vespasian, however, again established the provincial government, and compelled the Greeks to pay a yearly tribute.]. The Peloponnesus, from the Promontory of Malea to the town of Ægium [Now Vostitza.] on the Corinthian Gulf, is 190 miles in length, and 125 miles across from Elis to Epidaurus; the distance being, from Olympia to Argos, through Arcadia, sixty-eight miles. The distance from Olympia to Phlius has been already mentioned [See p..]. Throughout the whole of this region, as though nature had been desirous to compensate for the inroads of the sea, seventy-six mountains raise their lofty heads.

### Chap. 11. (7.)—Attica.

At the narrow neck of the Isthmus, Hellas begins, by our people known as Græcia. The first state that presents itself is Attica, anciently called Acte [From the Greek ἀκτὴ, “the sea-shore.”]. It touches the Isthmus in that part of it which is called Megaris, from the colony of Megara [It still retains its ancient name.], lying on the opposite side to Pagæ [Or Pegæ. It lay on the borders of the Corinthian Gulf, being, as Pliny says, the utmost point of the Peloponnesus on that side, as Megara was on the Saronic Gulf. According to Kruse, Psato occupies its site, but according to Lapie, Alepochori. The former is most probably correct.].

These two towns are situate at the spot where the Peloponnesus projects to the greatest distance; being placed, one on each side, upon the very shoulders of Hellas as it were. The Pagæans, as well as the people of Ægosthena [On the Corinthian Gulf. Porto Ghermano occupies its site.], belong to the jurisdiction of Megara. On the coast there is the port of Schœnos [On the Saronic Gulf, to the north of Cenchreæ. The present Porto Cocosi occupies its site.], the towns of Sidus [Now Leandra, according to Ansart.] and Cremmyon [Or Crommyon. It was the chief place on the Saronic Gulf, between the Isthmus, properly so called, and Megara. Its ruins are thought to be those seen near the chapel of Saint Theodorus. It was said to have been the haunt of the wild boar killed by Theseus.], the Scironian Rocks [So called from being the scene of the ravages of the robber Sciron. They are now called Kaki Scala.], six miles in length, Geranea, Megara, and Eleusis [Famous as the principal seat of the worship of the goddesses Demeter and Persephone. Its remains are to be seen at the modern Lefsina.]. Œnoë [Pera Chora marks its site. It was a member of the Tetrapolis of Attica, and Probalinthos another.] and Probalinthos also formerly existed here; the ports of Piræus and Phalerum [Ulrichs, the best authority, places the port of Phalerum at the east corner of the great Phaleric Bay, in the vicinity of Tripirghi, or the Three Towers. The three harbours of the Piræus are the present Phanari, Stratiotiki or Paschalimani, and Drako or Porto Leone.] are distant from the Isthmus fifty-five miles, being united to Athens, which lies in the interior, by a wall [The Piræus was united to the city by two walls, called the “Long Walls,” forty stadia in length. The length of the Phaleric wall was thirty-five stadia.] five miles in length. Athens is a free city, and needs [It is to be regretted that such was his opinion. He could have well spared space for a description of it.] not a word more from us in its commendation; of fame it enjoys even more than enough. In Attica there are the Fountains of Cephisia [The city of Cephisia, still called Kivisia, was one of the twelve cities of Cecrops. The fountain of transparent water is still to be seen here.], Larine, Callirrhoë Enneacrunos [Or the “Nine Springs.” It was the only source of good water for drinking purposes in Athens. This spring is still called by its ancient name. Of Larine nothing seems to be known.], and the mountains of Brilessus [This is thought to have been the ancient name of the mountain afterwards known as Pentelicus, so famous for its marble, now called Mendeli or Penteli.], Ægialeus, Icarius, Hymettus [The northern or Greater Hymettus is now called Telo-Vuni, the southern or Lesser Mavro-Vuni.], Lycabettus [On the N.E. of Athens, now called the Hill of Saint George.], and the place where Ilissus [Probably on the river of the same name.] stood. At the distance of forty-five miles from the Piræus is the Promontory of Sunium [Now Capo Colonna.]. There is also the Promontory of Thoricos [North of Sunium and the modern bay of Panorimo. Thoricus was one of the Demi of Attica.]; Potamos [This was the name of two Demi, though probably one place. It lay on the east coast to the north of Thoricus. Its harbour was probably the modern Dhaskalio; and the town is placed by Leake at the ruins called Paleokastro, to the south of the village of Dardheza.], Steria [On the east coast, between Prasiæ and Brauron.], and Brauron [One of the twelve ancient cities of Cecrops, on the eastern coast. Its name is supposed to be preserved in those of the villages Vraona and Paleo Vraona.], once towns, the borough of Rhamnus [A Demus belonging to the tribe Æantis. It was famous for its temple of Nemesis, the goddess of retribution. The present Obrio Castro occupies its site.], the place where Marathon [Memorable for the defeat of the Persians by the Athenians, B.C. 490. The site of the ancient town of Marathon is thought not to have been at the modern village of Marathon, but a place called Vrana, to the south of it.] stood, the Thriasian [The eastern part of the Eleusinian plain was thus called, from the Demus of Thria. Its exact site is uncertain.] plain, the town of Melite [Melite was a Demus of the tribe Cecropis, of Athens, west of the Inner Ceramicus.], and Oropus [Now Oropo, on the eastern frontiers of Bœotia and Attica, near the Euripus. It originally belonged to the Bœotians.] upon the confines of Bœotia.

### Chap. 12.—Bœotia.

In this country are Anthedon [Its ruins are supposed to be those seen eight miles from Egripo. Lukisi has also been suggested.], Onchestus [Its ruins are still to be seen on the S.W. slope of Mount Faga.], the free town of Thespiæ [On the S.E. slope of Mount Helicon. Its ruins are to be seen at the modern Eremo or Rimokastro.], Lebadea [Now Livadhia. The celebrated cave of Trophonius stood in its vicinity.], and then Thebes [Extensive remains of it are still to be seen; but the modern town of Theba or Stiva stands only on the site of its ancient Cadmea or citadel.], surnamed Bœotian [To distinguish it from places of the same name in Egypt, Phthiotis, and Lucania.], which does not yield the palm to Athens even in celebrity; the native land, according to the common notion, of the two Divinities Liber and Hercules. The birth-place of the Muses too is pointed out in the grove of Helicon. To this same Thebes also belong the forest of Cithæron [On the range of mountains of that name separating Bœotia from Megaris and Attica. The forest abounded in game, and the vicinity was a favourite scene of the poetic legends. Paleovuni is the highest summit of the Heliconian range. Leake fixes the Grove of the Muses at the present church of Saint Nicholas, at the foot of Mount Marandali, one of the summits of Helicon.], and the river Ismenus. Besides these, there are in Bœotia the Fountains of Œdipodia, Psamathe, Dirce, Epicrane, Arethusa, Hippocrene [These fountains or springs are very difficult to identify, but Hippocrene, or the “Horse-Spring” (said to have been produced by Pegasus striking the ground with his feet), was probably at the present Makariotissa; while Aganippe is the fountain that flows midway between Paleo-panaghia and Pyrgaki.], Aganippe, and Gargaphie; and, besides the mountains already mentioned, Mycalesos, Hadylius, and Acontius. The remaining towns between Megara and Thebes are Eleutheræ [This place was originally a member of the Bœotian confederacy, but joined the Athenians, though it did not become an Attic Demus. Leake thinks that its ruins are those seen at Myupoli. Ross thinks that it stood to the east of Ghyfto-kastro, while other writers are of opinion that it stood more to the west, near the modern village of Kundara.], Haliartus [Razed to the ground by the Roman prætor Lucretius, for having espoused the cause of king Perseus. Its remains are seen about a mile from the village of Mazi, on the road from Thebes to Lebadæa.], Platææ [Memorable for the defeat of the Persians under Mardonius, B.C. 479.], Pheræ, Aspledon [Distant twenty stadia from Orchomenus. Leake places it at the modern Izamali, Forchhammer at Avro-Kastro.], Hyle [Its site is uncertain. Leake supposes it to be at Paleokastro, between the north end of Lake Hylica and the foot of Mount Palea. Ulrichs places it at the south end of the lake.], Thisbe [The modern Kakosia occupies its site.], Erythræ [At the foot of Mount Cithæron. Leake places it eastward of Katzula, at the foot of the rocks there.], Glissas [Leake identifies it with the ruins on the torrent of Plataniki, below the mountain of Siamata. Pausanias says it was situate seven stadia beyond Teumessus, and at the foot of Hypatus, now Siamata.], and Copæ [On Lake Copaïs. The modern village of Topolia occupies its site.]; near the river Cephisus, Larymna and Anchoa [The waters of the Cephisus here burst forth from their subterraneous channel.]; as also Medeon, Phlygone, Acræphia [On Lake Copaïs. Its ruins are at a short distance to the south of the modern Kardhitza.], Coronea [South of Mount Helicon. Its principal remains are those of its theatre, a temple of Hera, and the agora or market-place.], and Chæronea [On the borders of Phocis; famous for the battles fought in its vicinity between the Athenians and Bœotians, B.C. 447, and between Philip of Macedon and the Athenians and Bœotians, B.C. 338, and that in which Sylla defeated the generals of Mithridates B.C. 86. It stood on the site of the modern village of Kapurna.]. Again, on the coast and below Thebes, are Ocalea [On the river Copaïs, at the foot of Mount Tilphusion.], Heleon, Scolos, Schœnos [On the river of that name, and on the road from Thebes to Anthedon.], Peteon [Its site appears to be unknown.], Hyriæ [Enumerated by Homer with Aulis. Ancient critics have, without sufficient reason, identified it with Hysiæ.], Mycalesos [It was sacked by the Athenians, B.C. 413, and in ruins in the time of Pausanias.], Iresion, Pteleon, Olyros, and Tanagra [The modern Grimadha or Grimala occupies its site.], the people of which are free; and, situate upon the very mouth of the Euripus [The modern channel of Egripo.], a strait formed by the opposite island of Eubœa, Aulis [The place where the Grecian fleet assembled when about to sail for Troy. Leake says that its harbour is now called Vathy, evidently from the Greek βαθὺς, “wide.”], so famous for its capacious harbour. The Bœotians formerly had the name of Hyantes.

After them come the Locrians, surnamed Epicnemidii [So called from dwelling near Mount Cnemis.], formerly called Leleges, through whose country the river Cephisus passes, in its course to the sea. Their towns are Opus [Its ruins are to be seen three miles from the modern Talanti.]; from which the Opuntian Gulf [Now the Golfo di Talanti.] takes its name, and Cynos. Daphnus [On the Eubœan Sea, which here extended to the Corinthian Gulf. It was in ruins in the time of Strabo. Cynus was the chief sea-port of the Locri Opuntii. Its site is marked by a tower called Palæopyrgo, and some ruins to the south of the village of Livanates.] is the only town of Phocis situate on the coast. In the interior of Locris is Elatea [The modern village of Lefti stands on its site, and there are some ruins to be seen.], and on the banks of the Cephisus, as we have previously stated [In C. iv. of this Book.], Lilæa, and, facing Delphi, Cnemisæ [Or Cnemides, a fortress built on the range of Mount Cnemis, near the modern Nikoraki.] and Hyampolisæ [Ravaged by Philip of Macedon. Its ruins are near the modern village of Vogdhani.]. Again, upon the coast of the Locrians, are Larymna [The Lower Larymna. Its ruins are seen between the modern Matzumadi and Martini.], and Thronium [Its ruins are to be seen near the modern Andera.], near which last the river Boagrius enters the sea. Also, the towns of Narycion, Alope [Between Daphnus and Cynus. Gell found its ruins on a hill near the sea-shore.], and Scarphia [Its ruins are to be seen three miles from those of Thronium.]; and then the gulf which receives the name of the Maliac [Now called the Gulf of Zeitoun. The people from whom it received its name were the Malienses.] from the people who dwell there, and upon which are the towns of Halcyone, Econia, and Phalara [Its ruins are two leagues from the modern town of Zeitoun.].

### Chap. 13.—Doris.

Doris comes next, in which are Sperchios [Or Sperchia.], Erineon [Strabo says that it lay below the town of Pindus. It is perhaps the present Palæo Choria.], Boion [Its ruins are placed by Leake near the modern Mariolates.], Pindus, and Cytinum [Like Pindus, one of the four towns or Tetrapolis of Doris. Its site corresponds to the modern Gravia.]. Behind Doris lies Mount Œta.

### Chap. 14.—Phthiotis.

Hæmonia follows, a country which has often changed its name, having been successively called Pelasgic Argos, Hellas, Thessaly, and Dryopis, always taking its surname from its kings. In this country was born the king whose name was Græcus; and from whom Græcia was so called; and here too was born Hellen [He seems to think that the name Græcus is older than that of Hellen, in which he is supported by Apollodorus.], from whom the Hellenes derive their name. The same people Homer has called by three different names, Myrmidones, Hellenes, and Achæi.

That portion of these people which inhabit the country adjacent to Doris are called Phthiotæ. Their towns are Echinus [So called from Echion, fabled to have sprung from the dragon’s teeth. Its site is marked by the modern village called Akhino. The Sperchius is now called the Ellada.], at the mouth of the river Sperchius, and, at four miles from the narrow pass of Thermopylæ [This famous spot still retains its name. It is also called Bocca di Lupo.], Heraclea, which from it takes its surname of Trachin [From τραχὺς, “narrow,” in allusion to the narrowness of the mountain passes. Brotier places it on the site of the modern Zeitoun, but he is probably in error.]. Here too is Mount Callidromus [A peak of the range of Œta.], and the celebrated towns of Hellas [The name of a town and small district of Phthiotis: it eventually gave its name to the whole of Greece, which by its inhabitants was called Hellas.], Halos [Near the river Amphrysus. Leake places it at Kefalosi, at the extremity of Mount Othrys.], Lamia [The modern Zeitoun.], Phthia [Said to have been the city of Achilles.], and Arne [According to Stephanus of Byzantium, Cierium was identical with Arne. Leake places it at the modern Mataranga.].
