---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 18-29."
chapter_order: 245
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 18.—Defects in the Smaragdus.

It will be only proper, too, seeing that the prices of these stones are so exorbitant, to point out their defects. Some defects, no doubt, are common to all of them, while others, again, like those found in the human race, are peculiar only to those of a certain country. Thus, for example, the stones of Cyprus are not all green alike, and in the same smaragdus some parts are more or less so than others, the stone not always preserving that uniform deep tint which characterizes the smaragdus of Scythia. In other instances, a shadow runs through the stone, and the colour becomes dulled thereby; the consequence of which is, that its value is depreciated; and even more so, when the colour is thin and diluted.

In consequence of the defects [Ajasson remarks that the greater part of the defects here described belong in reality to the Dioptase.] in these stones, they have been divided into several classes. Some of them are obscure, and are then known as “blind” stones; some have a certain density, which impairs their transparency; others, again, are mottled, and others covered with a cloud. This cloud, however, is altogether different from the shadow above mentioned; for it is a defect which renders the stone of a whitish hue, and not of a transparent green throughout; presenting, as it does, in the interior or upon the surface, a certain degree of whiteness which arrests the vision. Other defects, again, in these stones, are filaments, salt-like [“Sal.” See Chapters,,, and, of this Book.] grains, or traces of lead ore, faults which are mostly common to them all.

Next after the kinds above described, the smaragdus of Æthiopia is held in high esteem; being found, as Juba tells us, at a distance of twenty-five days’ journey from Coptos. These are of a bright green, but are seldom to be met with perfectly clear or of an uniform colour. Democritus includes in this class the stones that are known as “herminei,” and as “Persian” stones; the former of which are of a convex, massive shape, while the latter are destitute of transparency, but have an agreeable, uniform colour, and satisfy the vision without allowing it to penetrate them; strongly resembling, in this respect, the eyes of cats and of panthers, which are radiant without being diaphanous. In the sun, he says, they lose their brilliancy, but they are radiant in the shade, the brightness of them being seen at a greater distance than in the case of other stones. One other fault, too, in all these stones is, that they often have a colour like that of honey or rancid oil, or else are clear and transparent, but not green.

These defects exist in the smaragdi of Attica, [Ajasson is of opinion that Diallage is here meant, known also by the names of Bronzite, schillerspath, schillerstein, and omphasite.] more particularly, which are found in the silver-mines there, at a place known by the name of Thoricos. [See B. iv. c. 11.] These last are never so massive as the others, and are always more pleasing to the sight when viewed from a distance: lead ore, too, is often to be detected in them, or, in other words, they have a leaden appearance when looked at in the sun. [“In sole” seems a preferable reading to “in solo,” “on the ground,” as given by the Bamberg MS.] One peculiarity in them is, that some of them become impaired by age, gradually lose their green colour, and are even deteriorated by exposure to the sun. Next to the stones of Attica come those of Media, a variety which presents the most numerous tints of all, and sometimes approaches sapphiros [See Chapter of this Book; where it will be shown that this probably is not the modern Sapphire.] in colour. These stones are wavy, [Ajasson suggests that these may have been Quartz agates of the dendritic or arborized kind.] and represent various natural objects, such as poppy-heads, for example, birds, the young of animals, and feathers: all of them appear naturally of a green colour, but become improved by the application of oil. No stones of this species are of a larger size than these.

I am not aware that any of these stones [He probably alludes here to some variety of the Chalcedony or Opal quartz.] are still in existence at Chalcedon, the copper mines of that locality being now exhausted: but be this as it may, they were always the smallest in size and the most inferior in value. Brittle, and of a colour far from distinctly pronounced, they resembled in their tints the feathers that are seen in the tail of the peacock or on the necks of pigeons. [Said with reference to Chrysoprase, Ajasson thinks; a leek-green chalcedony, coloured by nickel.] More or less brilliant, too, according to the angle at which they were viewed, they presented an appearance like that of veins and scales. There was another defect, also, peculiar to these stones, known as “sarcion,” from the circumstance that a kind of flesh [Probably the Cacholong of modern mineralogy, a variety of opal, nearly opaque, and of a porcelain or bluish white colour.] appeared to attach itself to the stone. The mountain near Chalcedon, where these stones were gathered, is still known by the name of “Smaragdites.” Juba informs us that a kind of smaragdus, known as “cloras,” [Ajasson and Brotero identify this with milk-white chalcedony; but on what authority, does not appear.] is used in Arabia as an ornament for buildings, as also the stone which by the people of Egypt is called “alabastrites.” On the same authority, too, we learn that there are several varieties of the smaragdus in the neighbouring mountains, and that stones like those of Media are found in Mount Taygetus, [See B. iv. c. 8.] as also in Sicily.

### Chap. 19.—The Precious Stone Called Tanos. Chalcosmaragdos.

Among the smaragdi is also included the precious stone known as “tanos.” [Supposed by Ajasson to be the Euclase, a brittle green stone, composed of silica, alumina, and glucina. Haüy gave it this name from the Greek words εὖ, “easily” and κλάω, “to break.” According to Dana, however, Euclase was first brought from Peru: if such is the fact, we must, perhaps, look for its identification in Epidote, a green silicate of alumina.] It comes from Persia, and is of an unsightly green, and of a soiled colour within. There is the chalcosmaragdos [“Brazen smaragdus.” It was probably Dioptase, combined with copper Pyrites. See Notes,, and, above.] also, a native of Cyprus, the face of which is mottled with coppery veins. Theophrastus relates that he had found it stated in the Egyptian histories, that a king of Babylon once sent to the king of Egypt a smaragdus [With reference to this statement and the others in this Chapter, Ajasson remarks that these stones can have been nothing but prases, green jaspers, fusible spaths, emerald quartz, and fluates of lime.] four cubits in length by three in breadth. He informs us, also, that in a temple of Jupiter in Egypt there was an obelisk made of four smaragdi, forty cubits in length, and four in breadth at one extremity, and two at the other. He says, too, that at the period at which he wrote, there was in the Temple of Hercules at Tyrus a large column made of a single smaragdus; [Herodotus mentions this smaragdus and the temple, B. ii. c. 44, as having been seen by himself.] though very possibly it might only be pseudo-smaragdus, a kind of stone not uncommonly found in Cyprus, where a block had been discovered, composed, one half of smaragdus, and one half of jasper, [“Iaspis.” See Chapter of this Book.] and the liquid in which had not as yet been entirely transformed. Apion, surnamed “Plistonices,” [Meaning “the conqueror of many,” probably; in reference to his contentious disposition. See end of B. xxx.] has left a very recent statement, that there was still in existence, in his time, in the Labyrinth of Egypt, a colossal statue of Serapis made of a single smaragdus, nine cubits in height.

### Chap. 20.—Beryls: Eight Varieties of Them. Defects in Beryls.

Beryls, it is thought, are of the same [The Beryl and the Emerald are only varieties of the same species, the latter owing its colour to oxide of chrome, the former to oxide of iron.] nature as the smaragdus, or at least closely analogous. India [The best Beryls are found in Siberia, Hindostan, Brazil, and the United States.] produces them, and they are rarely to be found elsewhere. The lapidaries cut all beryls of an hexagonal [The crystals are naturally hexagonal.] form; because the colour, which is deadened by a dull uniformity of surface, is heightened by the reflection resulting from the angles. If they are cut in any other way, these stones have no brilliancy whatever. The most esteemed beryls are those which in colour resemble the pure green of the sea; [Hence the name of the sky-blue, or mountain-green beryl, aquamarine.] the chrysoberyl [Or “golden beryl,” The modern Chrysoberyl is altogether a different stone from the one here described, which probably is identical with Chrysoprase or leek-green Chalcedony, the stone next mentioned.] being next in value, a stone of a somewhat paler colour, but approaching a golden tint. Closely allied to this last in its brilliancy, but of a more pallid colour, and thought by some to constitute a separate genus, is chrysoprasus. [“Leek-green and gold.”] In the fourth rank are reckoned the hyacinthine beryls; and in the fifth, those known as “aëroides.” [“Sky-coloured.”] Next, we have the wax-coloured beryls, and, after them, the oleaginous beryls, so called from the resemblance of their colour to that of oil. Last of all, there are the stones which closely resemble crystal in appearance; mostly disfigured by spots and filaments, and of a poor, faint, colour as well; all of them so many imperfections in the stone.

The people of India are marvellously fond of beryls of an elongated [The largest specimen of Beryl known, belonged to Don Pedro. It was not cylindrical in form, but shaped like the head of a calf, and weighed 225 ounces troy.] form, and say that these are the only precious stones they prefer wearing without the addition of gold: hence it is that, after piercing them, they string them upon the bristles of the elephant. It is generally agreed, however, that those stones should not be perforated which are of the finest quality; and in this case they only enclose the extremities of them in studs of gold. They prefer, too, cutting the beryls in a cylindrical form, instead of setting them as precious stones; an elongated shape being the one that is most highly esteemed. Some are of opinion that beryls are naturally angular, [Which is the case.] and that when pierced they become improved in colour; the white substance being thus removed that lies within, and their brilliancy heightened by the reflection of the gold in which they are set; or, at all events, their transparency being increased by this diminution in their thickness. In addition to the defects already [In Chapter of this Book.] mentioned, and which are pretty nearly the same as those to which the smaragdus is subject, beryls are affected with cloudy spots, [“Pterygia.”] like those on the finger-nails in appearance. In our own part of the world, it is thought that they are sometimes found in the countries that lie in the vicinity of Pontus. [In the Uralian Mountains, for example.] The people of India, by colouring crystal, have found a method of imitating various precious stones, beryls in particular.

### Chap. 21. (6.)—Opals: Seven Varieties of Them.

Opals [Opals are hydrated silica, the amount of water varying.] are at once very similar to, and very different from, beryls, and only yield to the smaragdus in value. India, too, is the sole [On the contrary, precious Opal is found in Hungary, at Frankfort, and in Honduras, and other varieties in numerous parts of the world, including the East Indies.] parent of these precious stones, thus completing her glory as being the great producer of the most costly gems. Of all precious stones, it is opal that presents the greatest difficulties of description, it displaying at once the piercing fire of carbunculus, [See Chapter of this Book.] the purple brilliancy of amethystos, and the sea-green of smaragdus, the whole blended together and refulgent with a brightness that is quite incredible. Some authors have compared the effect of its refulgence to that of the colour known as Armenian [See B. xxxv. c..] pigment, while others speak of it as resembling the flame of burning sulphur, or of flame fed with oil. In size, the opal is about as large as a hazel-nut, [The largest opal known is in the Imperial cabinet at Vienna. It is the size of a man’s fist, and weighs 17 ounces, but is full of fissures.] and, with reference to it, there is a remarkable historical anecdote related. For there is still in existence a stone of this class, on account of which Antonius proscribed the senator Nonius, son of the Nonius Struma, whom the poet Catullus [See Carm. 53 of the Poems of Catullus.] was so displeased at seeing in the curule chair, and grandfather of the Servilius Nonianus, who in our own times was consul. [A.U.C. 788.] On being thus proscribed, Nonius took to flight, carrying with him, out of all his wealth, nothing but this ring, the value of which, it is well known, was estimated at two millions of sesterces. How marvellous must have been the cruelty, how marvellous the luxurious passion of Antonius, thus to proscribe a man for the possession of a jewel! and no less marvellous must have been the obstinacy of Nonius, who could thus dote upon what had been the cause of his proscription; for we see the very brutes even tear off the portion of their body for the sake of which they know their existence to be imperilled, [See B. viii. c. 47. He alludes to the story of the Beaver.] and so redeem themselves by parting with it.

### Chap. 22.—Defects in Opals: The Modes of Testing Them.

Defects in opal are, a colour inclining to that of the flower called heliotropium, [See B. xxii. c. 29.] or to that of crystal or of hailstones; salt-like grains intervening; roughness on the surface; or sharp points, presenting themselves to the eye. There is no stone that is imitated by fraudulent dealers with more exactness than this, in glass, the only mode of detecting the imposition being by the light of the sun. For when a false [This is the case with common opal, as distinguished from precious opal.] opal is held between the finger and thumb, and exposed to the rays of that luminary, it presents but one and the same transparent colour throughout, limited to the body of the stone: whereas the genuine opal offers various refulgent tints in succession, and reflects now one hue and now another, as it sheds its luminous brilliancy upon the fingers.

This stone, in consequence of its extraordinary beauty, has been called “pæderos” [“Lovely youth.”] by many authors; and some who make a distinct species of it, say that it is the same as the stone that in India is called “sangenon.” These last-mentioned stones, it is said, are found in Egypt also, Arabia, and, of very inferior quality, in Pontus. Galatia, too, is said to produce them, as also Thasos and Cyprus. The finest in quality of them have all the beauty of opal, but they are of a softer brilliancy, and are mostly rough on the surface. Their colour is a mixture of sky-blue and purple, and the green hues of the smaragdus are wanting: those, too, are preferred, which have their brilliancy deepened by a vinous hue, rather than those which have their colours diluted, as it were, with water.

### Chap. 23.—Sardonyx; the Several Varieties of It. Defects in the Sardonyx.

Thus far we have spoken in reference to the stones, which, it is generally agreed, belong to the highest rank; in obedience, more particularly, to a decree [Said ironically. There is a somewhat similar remark in B. xxxiii. c..] that has been passed by the ladies to that effect. There is less certainty with respect to those upon which the men as well have been left to form a judgment; seeing that the value of each stone depends more particularly upon the caprice of the individual and the rivalry that exists in reference thereto; as, for example, when Claudius Cæsar was so much in the habit of wearing the smaragdus and the sardonyx. [A mixture of brown-red and white chalcedony.] The first Roman who wore a sardonyx, according to Demostratus, was the elder Africanus, since whose time this stone has been held in very high esteem at Rome: for which reason, we shall give it the next place after the opal. By sardonyx, as the name [From the Greek Σάρδιον, “sard,” and ὄνυξ, a “finger nail.”] itself indicates, was formerly understood a sarda with a white ground beneath it, like the flesh beneath the human finger-nail; both parts of the stone being equally transparent. Such, according to Ismenias, Demostratus, Zenothemis, and Sotacus, is the sardonyx of India; the last two giving the name of “blind” sardonyx to all the other stones of this class which are not transparent, and which have now entirely appropriated the name to themselves. For, at the present day, the Arabian sardonyx presents no traces whatever of the Indian sarda, [His meaning seems to be that it does not present the bright transparent red of the Indian Sarda or Carnelian. See Chapter of this Book.] it being a stone that has been found to be characterized by several different colours of late; black or azure for the base, and vermilion, surrounded with a line of rich white, for the upper part, not without a certain glimpse [“Quâdam spe.” Un soupçon, as the French would say.] of purple as the white passes into the red. [This would appear, from the description, to be an Agate, or variegated Chalcedony.]

We learn from Zenothemis that in his time these stones were not held by the people of India in any high esteem, although they are found there of so large a size as to admit of the hilts of swords being made of them. It is well known, too, that in that country they are exposed to view by the mountain-streams, and that in our part of the world they were formerly valued from the fact that they are nearly the only ones [He probably intends to include the Sarda or Carnelian here.] among the engraved precious stones that do not bring away the wax when an impression is made. The consequence is, that our example has at last taught the people of India to set a value upon them, and the lower classes there now pierce them even, to wear them as ornaments for the neck; the great proof, in fact, at the present day, of a sardonyx being of Indian origin. Those of Arabia are remarkable for their marginal line of brilliant white, of considerable breadth, and not glistening in hollow fissures in the stone or upon the sides, but shining upon the very surface, at the margin, and supported by a ground intensely black beneath. In the stones of India, this ground is like wax in colour, [A variety, probably, of common Chalcedony.] or else like cornel, with a circle also of white around it. In some of these stones, too, there is a play of colours like those of the rainbow, while the surface is redder even than the shell of the sea-locust. [See B. ix. cc. 74, 88, and B. xxxii. c..]

Those stones which are like honey in appearance, or of a fæculent [“Fæculentæ,” of the colour of wine-lees.] colour—such being the name given to one defect in them—are generally disapproved of. They are rejected also when the white zone blends itself with the other colours, and its limits are not definitely marked; or if, in like manner, it is irregularly intersected by any other colour; it being looked upon as an imperfection if the regularity of any one of the colours is interrupted by the interposition of another. The sardonyx of Armenia is held in some esteem, but the zone round it is of a pallid hue.

### Chap. 24.—Onyx: The Several Varieties of It.

We must give some account also of onyx, [So called from ὄνυξ, a “finger-nail.” It is a variety of the Chalcedony, resembling Agate, but the colours are arranged in flat horizontal planes.] because of the name which it partly shares in common with sardonyx. This name, though in some places [See B. xxxiv. c., and B. xxxvi. c..] given to a marble, is here used to signify a precious stone. Sudines says, that in this stone there is a white portion which resembles the white of the human-finger nail, in addition to the colours of chrysolithos, sarda, and iaspis. According to Zenothemis, there are numerous varieties of the Indian onyx, the fiery-coloured, the black, and the cornel, with white veins encircling them, like an eye as it were, and in some cases running across them obliquely. [It is pretty clear that the Onyx of Pliny included not only our Onyx, but several other varieties of the Chalcedony.] Sotacus mentions an Arabian onyx, which differs from the rest; that of India, according to him, presenting small flames, [“Igniculos.”] each surrounded by one or more white zones; in a manner altogether different from the Indian sardonyx, which presents a series of white specks, while in this case it is one continuous circle. The Arabian onyx, on the other hand, is black, he says, with a white zone encircling it.

Satyrus says, that there is an onyx in India of a flesh colour, [“Carnosas.” It is somewhat doubtful whether our Carnelian, or Cornelian, take its name from this word, or from “cornus,” a cornel-berry.] partly resembling carbunculus, and partly chrysolithos and amethystos; a variety, however, which he altogether disapproves of. The real onyx, according to him, has numerous veins of variegated colours, interspersed with others of a milk-white hue; the shades of which, as they pass into one another, produce a tint which surpasses all description, and blends itself into one harmonious whole, of a most beautiful appearance.

Not unlike sardonyx, too, is sarda, [See Chapter.] a stone which also has, in part, a kindred name with it; but before passing on to it, we must first take some notice of all those precious stones which have a brilliancy like that of flame.

### Chap. 25. (7.)—Carbunculus: Twelve Varieties of It.

In the first rank among these is carbunculus, [Literally meaning a “red-hot coal.” The carbunculus of Pliny is supposed to include not only the red, or Iron and Iron-lime garnet, but the Spinelle ruby also, or Oriental ruby.] so called from its resemblance to fire; though in reality it is proof against the action of that element: [There is some truth in this, as some few kinds both of the Garnet and Ruby are infusible. Of the ruby, the red varieties change to brown, black, and opaque even, as the temperature increases, and on cooling become first green, and then nearly colourless, but at last resume their red colour.] hence it is that some persons call these stones “acaustoi.” [From the Greek; meaning “incombustible.”] There are various kinds of carbunculus, the Indian and the Garamantic, for example, which last has been also called the Carchedonian, [From Καρχήδων, the Greek name for Carthage.] in compliment to the former opulence of Great Carthage. [Carthago Magna, so called in contradistinction to Carthage Nova, or New Carthage, in Spain.] To these are added the Æthiopian and the Alabandic stones, the latter of which are found at Orthosia [See B. v. c. 29.] in Caria, but are cut and polished at Alabanda. [In the vicinity of Orthosia. It is from this place that one kind of garnet is now called “Almandine.” There is also the Almandine, or violet-coloured ruby. Sec Beckmann, Hist. Inv. Vol. II. p. 238. Bohn’s Edition. It is probable that Carthage was the great entrepôt for the carbunculi of the Garamantes and Æthiopia, where Red sapphire, Red corundum, or Oriental ruby, was probably found.] In addition to this, each kind is subdivided into the male carbunculus and the female, the former of which is of a more striking brilliancy, the brightness of the latter being not so strong. In the male varieties too, we see some in which the fire is clearer than in others; while some, again, are of a darker [A variety, perhaps, of Iron garnet, or Iron-lime garnet.] hue, or else have their brilliancy more deeply seated, and shine with a more powerful lustre than others when viewed in the sun.

The most highly esteemed, however, is the amethyst-coloured [Desfontaines suggests that this may have been the Balas ruby, or possibly the Syrian Garnet, of a violet purple colour. Not improbably it is the Almandine ruby.] stone, the fire at the extremity of which closely approaches the violet tint of amethystos: next in value to which, are the stones known as “syrtites,” radiant with a wavy, feathery, [“Pinnato fulgore.” This mottled appearance is to be seen in the interior of some red garnets.] refulgence. They are found more particularly, it is said, where the reflection is most powerful of the rays of the sun. Satyrus says that the carbunculus [Common garnets, probably.] of India has no lustre, that it is mostly soiled, and that in all cases its brilliancy is of a tawny complexion. The Æthiopian stones, he says, are dense, emit no lustre, and burn with a concentrated flame. According to Callistratus, the refulgence of this stone should be of a whitish hue, and, when placed upon a table, it should heighten by its lustre other stones placed near it that are clouded at the edge. Hence it is, that many writers speak of this stone as the white carbunculus, while the Indian stone, with its comparatively feeble lustre, is known by the name of “lignyzon.” [Sillig suggests that this may be from λιγνὺς, “soot.” The reading, however, is extremely doubtful.] The Carchedonian stones, they say, are of much smaller size than the others; but those of India admit of being hollowed out, and making vessels that will hold as much as one sextarius [See Introduction to Vol. III. If this is the truth, they were made of some of the crystals of the garnet, probably.] even.

According to Archelaüs, the Carchedonian carbunculus is of a more swarthy appearance than the others, but, when exposed to the light of the fire or sun, and viewed obliquely, the brilliancy of it is much more intense than that of the rest. He says, too, that this stone, when overshadowed by a roof, has a purple tint; that when viewed in the open air, it is of a flame colour; and that, when exposed to the rays of the sun, it scintillates. He states also that wax, if sealed with these stones, in the shade even, will melt. Many authors have asserted that the Indian stones are paler than the Carchedonian, and that, quite the converse of these last, they are all the less brilliant when viewed obliquely; as also, that in the male Carchedonian stone there are luminous points like stars within, while, in the case of the female stone, the whole of its refulgence is thrown beyond it. The stones of Alabanda too, it is said, are darker than the other kinds, and rough on the surface. In the vicinity also of Miletus, there are stones of this description found in the earth, resembling those of Alabanda in colour, and proof against the action of fire.

According to Theophrastus, [De Lapid. see 61.] these stones are to be found also at Orchomenus in Arcadia and in the Isle of Chios; [“Pliny has here committed a gross mistake, which has not been observed by Hardouin. Theophrastus, in the passage alluded to, does not speak of a ruby, but the well-known black marble of Chio; though he calls both carbunculus, a name given to the ruby, on account of its likeness to a burning coal, and to the black marble on account of its resemblance to a quenched coal or cinder; and the latter, as well as the Obsidian stone, was sometimes used for mirrors.”—Beckmann, Hist. Inv. Vol. II. pp. 67, 68. Bohn’s Edition.] the former [“Illos.” He should have said “hos”—“the latter.”] of which are of a darker hue, and are used for making mirrors. He says too, that at Trœzen they are found of various colours and mottled with white spots, those found at Corinth being of a more pallid, whitish, hue. He states also, that they are sometimes imported from Massilia. Bocchus informs us in his writings, that these stones are extracted from the ground at Olisipo; [See B. iv. c. 35; the present Lisbon.] at the cost of great labour, however, in consequence of the parched, argillaceous, nature of the soil.

### Chap. 26.—Defects in Carbunculus, and the Mode of Testing It.

Nothing is more difficult than to distinguish the several varieties of this stone, so great an opportunity do they afford to artistic skill of compelling them to reflect the colours of substances placed beneath. It is possible, they say, to heighten the brilliancy of dull stones, by steeping them for fourteen days in vinegar, this adventitious lustre being retained by them as many months. They are counterfeited, too, with great exactness in glass; but the difference may be detected with the touchstone; the same being the case also with other artificial stones, as the material is always of a softer nature and comparatively brittle. When thus tested by the stone, hard knots, too, are detected in them; and the weight of the glass counterfeit is always less. In some cases, too, they present small blisters within, which shine like silver.

### Chap. 27.—Ahthracitis.

There is also a fossil stone found in Thesprotia, known as “anthracitis,” [Sec B. iv. c. 1.] and resembling a burning coal [“Carbo.” This word may mean either a “burning coal” or “charcoal” hence the confusion that has arisen in identifying the mineral substance that is meant.] in appearance. Those who have stated that it is a native also of Liguria, are mistaken, in my opinion, unless perhaps it was to be found there in their time. Some of these stones, they say, are surrounded with a vein of white. Like those which we have mentioned above, they have a fiery colour, but there is this peculiarity in them, that when thrown into the fire they have all the appearance of becoming quenched and deadened; while, on the other hand, if they are drenched with water, they become doubly glowing. [See Note, to Chapter 25.]

### Chap. 28.—Sandastros. Sandaresos.

Of a kindred nature, too, is sandastros, [“Sandaresus” and “Sandasiros” are other readings. This stone has not been identified, but Ajasson is inclined to think that it may have been Aventurine quartz, and is the more inclined to this opinion, as that mineral is found in Persia, and sandastra or tchandastra is purely a Sanscrit word. The description, however, would hardly seem to apply to Aventurine.] known as “garamantites” by some: it is found in India, at a place of that name, and is a product also of the southern parts of Arabia. The great recommendation of it is, that it has all the appearance of fire placed behind a transparent substance, it burning with star-like scintillations within, that resemble drops of gold, and are always to be seen in the body of the stone, and never upon the surface. There are certain religious associations, too, connected with this stone, in consequence of the affinity which it is supposed to bear with the stars; these scintillations being mostly, in number and arrangement, like the constellations of the Pleiades and Hyades; a circumstance which had led to the use of it by the Chaldæi in the ceremonials which they practise.

Here, too, the male stones are distinguished from the female, by their comparative depth of colour and the vigorousness of the tints which they impart to objects near them: indeed the stones of India, it is said, quite dim the sight by their brilliancy. The flame of the female sandastros is of a more softened nature, and may be pronounced to be lustrous rather than brilliant. Some prefer the stone of Arabia to that of India, and say that this last bears a considerable resemblance to a smoke-coloured chrysolithos. Ismenias asserts that sandastros, in consequence of its extreme softness, will not admit of being polished, a circumstance which makes it sell all [Littré suggests that the reading here probably might be “ob id non magno”—“sell not so dear.”] the dearer: other writers, again, call these stones “sandrisitæ.” One point upon which all the authorities are agreed is, that the greater the number of stars upon the stone, the more costly it is in price.

The similarity of the name has sometimes caused this stone to be confounded with that known as “sandaresos,” and which Nicander calls “sandaserion,” and others “sandaseron.” Some, again, call this last-mentioned stone “sandastros,” and the former one “sandaresos.” The stone [It has not been identified.] that is thus mentioned by Nicander, is a native of India as well as the other, and likewise takes its name from the locality where it is found. The colour of it is that of an apple, or of green oil, and no one sets any value on it.

### Chap. 29.—Lychnis: Four Varieties of It.

To the same class of flame-coloured stones belongs that known as “lychnis;” [From λυχνὸς, a “lighted lamp” or “torch.” Brotero is of opinion that this is the Cherry-coloured ruby, that the Ionian stone is the Purple ruby, and that the kermes-berry coloured stone is the Scarlet or Spinelle ruby. From the distinct reference made to its electric nature, Ajasson identifies it with Tourmaline, a Silicate of alumina. Beckmann is of the same opinion; Hist. Inv. Vol. I. p. 88. Bohn’s Edition.] so called from its lustre being heightd by the light of the lamp, under which circumstances its tints are particularly pleasing. It is found in the vicinity of Orthosia, throughout the whole of Caria, and in the neighbouring localities; but the most approved stones are those that come from India. Some writers have given the name of “deadened” [“Remissiorem.”] carbunculus to a lychnis of second-rate quality, and similar in colour to the flower known as the “flower of Jove.” [See B. xxi. cc. 33, 39, where the “Flos Jovis” is mentioned in juxtaposition with the flower called “lychnis,” either the Umbel’d Campion rose, or the Common red rose Campion.] I find other varieties also mentioned, one with a purple radiance, and another of a scarlet [“Coccum.” “Kermes-berry coloured.” These kinds probably were, Indicolite or Blue tourmaline, and Rubellite or Red tourmaline.] tint. It is asserted, too, that these stones, when heated or rubbed between the fingers, will attract [As Beckmann remarks, he should have said that it first attracts, and then repels them; such being the case with Tourmaline.] chaff and filaments of paper.
