---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 24-29."
chapter_order: 41
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 24.—Pisidia.

The Pisidæ [Pisidia was a mountainous region formed by that part of the main chain of Mount Taurus which sweeps round in a semicircle parallel to the shore of the Pamphylian Gulf; the shore itself at the foot of the mountains forming the district of Pamphylia. On the south-east it was bounded by Cilicia, on the east and north-east by Lycaonia and Isauria, and by Phrygia Parorios on the north, where its boundaries greatly varied at different times.], formerly called the Solymi, occupy the higher parts of the mountains. In their country there is the colony of Cæsarea, also called Antiochia [Generally called “Antioch of Pisidia,” was situate on the south side of the mountain boundary between Phrygia and Pisidia. The modern Yalobatch is supposed to occupy its site. The remains of the ancient town are numerous. Its title of Cæsarea was probably given to it on its becoming a Roman colony early in the imperial period.], and the towns of Oroanda [D’Anville suggests that the modern Haviran occupies its site, and that Sadjakla stands on that of Sagalessos.] and Sagalessos.

### Chap. 25.—Lycaonia.

These people are bounded by Lycaonia [This country was bounded on the north by Galatia, on the east by Cappadocia, on the south by Cilicia Aspera, on the south-west by Isauria and Phrygia Parorios, and on the north-west by Great Phrygia. It was assigned under the Persian empire to the satrapy of Cappadocia, but considered by the Greek and Roman geographers the south-east part of Phrygia.], which belongs to the jurisdiction of the province of Asia [Phrygia, or the western part of Asia, the first part of the Asiatic continent that received the name of Asia. Sec Chapters 28 & 29 of the present Book.], to which also resort the people of Philomelium [D’Anville thinks that the place called Il-Goun occupies the site of Philomela.], Tymbrium [Hardouin suggests that the reading here is “Tibriani,” the people of Tibrias. Ansart is of opinion that Thymbrium is meant, the place at which Cyrus defeated the army of Crœsus.], Leucolithium [Its site is unknown. It was probably so called from the quarries of white stone or marble in its vicinity. Pelta and Tyrium are also equally unknown.], Pelta, and Tyrium. To this jurisdiction is also added a Tetrarchy of Lycaonia in that part which joins up to Galatia, containing fourteen states, with the famous city of Iconium [Iconium was regarded in the time of Xenophon as the easternmost town of Phrygia, while all the later authorities described it as the principal city of Lycaonia. In the Acts of the Apostles it is described as a very populous city, inhabited by Greeks and Jews. Its site is now called Kunjah or Koniyeh.]. In Lycaonia itself the most noted places are Thebasa [It has been suggested that this may be the Tarbassus of Artemidorus, quoted by Strabo. Hyde was in later times one of the episcopal cities of Lycaonia.] on Taurus, and Hyde, on the confines of Galatia and Cappadocia. On the [western] side of Lycaonia, and above Pamphylia, come the Milyæ [Their district is called Melyas by Herodotus, B. i. c. 173. The city of Arycanda is unknown.], a people descended from the Thracians; their city is Arycanda.

### Chap. 26.—Pamphylia.

The former name of Pamphylia [United with Cilicia it now forms the province of Caramania or Kermanieh. It was a narrow strip of the southern coast of Asia Minor, extending in an arch along the Pamphylian Gulf between Lycia on the west, Cilicia on the east, and on the north bordering on Pisidia.] was Mopsopia [Tradition ascribed the first Greek settlements in this country to Mopsus, son of Apollo (or of Rhacius), after the Trojan war.]. The Pamphylian Sea [Now called the Gulf of Adalia, lying between Cape Khelidonia and Cape Anemour.] joins up to that of Cilicia. The towns of Pamphylia are Side [Now called Candeloro, according to D’Anville and Beaufort.], Aspendum [Or Aspendus, an Argeian colony on the river Eurymedon. The “mountain” of Pliny is nothing but a hill or piece of elevated ground. It is supposed that it still retains its ancient name. In B. xxxi. c. 7, Pliny mentions a salt lake in its vicinity.], situate on the side of a mountain, Pletenissum [Hardouin suggests that the correct reading is ‘Petnelessum.’], and Perga [A city of remarkable splendour, between the rivers Catarrhactes and Cestrus, sixty stadia from the mouth of the former. It was a celebrated seat of the worship of Artemis or Diana. In the later Roman empire it was the capital of Pamphylia Secunda. It was the first place visited by St. Paul in Asia Minor. See Acts, xiii. 13 and xiv. 25. Its splendid ruins are still to be seen at Murtana, sixteen miles north-east of Adalia.]. There is also the Promontory of Leucolla, the mountain of Sardemisus, and the rivers Eurymedon [Now known as the Kapri-Su.], which flows past Aspendus, and Catarrhactes [Now called Duden-Su. It descends the mountains of Taurus in a great broken waterfall, whence its name.], near to which is Lyrnesus: also the towns of Olbia [Probably occupying the site of the modern Atalieh or Satalieh.], and Phaselis [On the borders of Lycia and Pamphylia, at the foot of Mount Solyma. Its ruins now bear the name of Tekrova.], the last on this coast.

### Chap. 27.—Mount Taurus.

Adjoining to Pamphylia is the Sea of Lycia and the country of Lycia [It was inclosed by Caria and Pamphylia on the west and east, and on the north by the district of Cibyrates in Phrygia.] itself, where the chain of Taurus, coming from the eastern shores, terminates the vast Gulf [The Gulf of Satalieh or Adalia.] by the Promontory of Chelidonium [Still known as Cape Khelidonia or Cameroso.]. Of immense extent, and separating nations innumerable, after taking its first rise at the Indian Sea [Parisot remarks here, “Pliny describes on this occasion, with an exactness very remarkable for his time, the chain of mountains which runs through the part of Asia known to the ancients, although it is evident that he confines the extent of them within much too small a compass.”], it branches off to the north on the right-hand side, and on the left towards the south. Then taking a direction towards the west, it would cut through the middle of Asia, were it not that the seas check it in its triumphant career along the land. It accordingly strikes off in a northerly direction, and forming an arc, occupies an immense tract of country, nature, designedly as it were, every now and then throwing seas in the way to oppose its career; here the Sea of Phœnicia, there the Sea of Pontus, in this direction the Caspian and Hyrcanian [The Caspian and the Hyrcanian Seas are generally looked upon as identical, but we find them again distinguished by Pliny in B. vi. c. 13, where he says that this inland sea commences to be called the Caspian after you have passed the river Cyrus (or Kúr), and that the Caspii live near it; and in C. 16, that it is called the Hyrcanian Sea, from the Hyrcani who live along its shores. The western side would therefore in strictness be called the Caspian, and the eastern the Hyrcanian Sea.], and then, opposite to them, the Lake Mæotis. Although somewhat curtailed by these obstacles, it still winds along between them, and makes its way even amidst these barriers; and victorious after all, it then escapes with its sinuous course to the kindred chain of the Riphæan mountains. Numerous are the names which it bears, as it is continuously designated by new ones throughout the whole of its course. In the first part of its career it has the name of Imaüs [“The name of Imaüs was, in the first instance, applied by the Greek geographers to the Hindú-Kúsh and to the chain parallel to the equator, to which the name of Himâlaya is usually given at the present day. The name was gradually extended to the intersection running north and south, the meridian axis of Central Asia, or the Bolor range. The divisions of Asia into ‘intra et extra Imaum,’ were unknown to Strabo and Pliny, though the latter describes the knot of mountains formed by the intersections of the Himâlaya, the Hindú-Kúsh, and Bolor, by the expression ‘quorum (Montes Emodi) promontorium Imaüs vocatur.’ The Bolor chain has been for ages, with one or two exceptions, the boundary between the empires of China and Turkestan.”— Dr. Smith’s Dictionary of Ancient Geography.], after which it is known successively by the names of Emodus, Paropanisus, Circius, Cambades, Paryadres, Choatras, Oreges, Oroandes, Niphates, Taurus, and, where it even out-tops itself, Caucasus. Where it throws forth its arms as though every now and then it would attempt to invade the sea, it bears the names of Sarpedon, Coracesius, Cragus, and then again Taurus. Where also it opens and makes a passage to admit mankind, it still claims the credit of an unbroken continuity by giving the name of “Gates” to these passes, which in one place are called the “Gates of Armenia [The Gates of Armenia are spoken of in B. vi. c. 12, the Gates of the Caspian in C. 16 of the same Book, and the Gates of Cilicia in C. of the present Book.],” in another the “Gates of the Caspian,” and in another the “Gates of Cilicia.” In addition to this, when it has been cut short in its onward career, it retires to a distance from the seas, and covers itself on the one side and the other with the names of numerous nations, being called, on the right-hand side the Hyrcanian and the Caspian, and on the left the Paryadrian [See C. ix. of the next Book.], the Moschian, the Amazonian, the Coraxican, and the Scythian chain. Among the Greeks it bears the one general name of Ceraunian [“Strabo gives this name to only the eastern portion of the Caucasian chain which overhangs the Caspian Sea and forms the northern boundary of Albania, and in which he places the Amazons. Mela seems to apply the name to the whole chain which other writers call Caucasus, confining the latter term to a part of it. Pliny (B. v. c. & B. vi. c. 11) gives precisely the same representation, with the additional error of making the Ceraunii (i. e. the Caucasus of others) part of the Great Taurus Chain. He seems to apply the name of Caucasus to the spurs which spread out both to the north-east and the south-east from the main chain near its eastern extremity, and which he regarded as a continuous range, bordering the western shores of the Caspian. See B. vi. c. 10.”— Dr. Smith’s Dictionary of Ancient Geography.].

### Chap. 28.—Lycia.

In Lycia, after leaving its promontory [Of Chelidonium, now Khelidonia, formed by the range of Taurus.], we come to the town of Simena, Mount Chimæra [See B. ii. c.. The flame which continually burned on this mountain has been examined by Beaufort, the modern traveller. The name of the mountain is now Yanar: it is formed of a mass of scaglia with serpentine. Spratt says that the flame is nothing more than a stream of inflammable gas issuing from a crevice, such as is seen in several places in the Apennines. By Homer it is represented as a fabulous monster, which is explained by Servius, the commentator of Virgil, in the following manner. He says that flames issue from the top of the mountain, and that there are lions in the vicinity; the middle part abounds in goats, and the lower part with serpents. Simena appears to be unknown.], which sends forth flames by night, and the city of Hephæstium [So called from Ἥφαιστος, the Greek name of Vulcan. Pliny mentions this spot also in B. ii. c.. The flame probably proceeded from an inflammable gas, or else was ignited by a stream of naphtha.], the heights above which are also frequently on fire. Here too formerly stood the city of Olympus [More generally known as Phœnicus, a flourishing city on Mount Olympus; now Yanar Dagh, a volcano on the eastern coast of Lycia, with which it often exchanged names. Having become the head-quarters of the pirates, it was destroyed by the Roman general Servilius Isauricus. Its ruins are to be seen at a spot called Deliktash.]; now we find the mountain places known as Gagæ [Mentioned again in B. xxxvi. c. 34, as the spot whence the gagates lapis or ‘agate’ took its name. The ruins at Aladja are regarded by Leake as marking the site of Gagæ; but Sir Charles Fellowes identifies the place with the modern village of Hascooe, the vicinity of which is covered with ruins.], Corydalla [On the road from Phaselis in Lycia to Patara. Its site is a village called Hadgivella, about sixteen miles south-west of Phaselis. The remains are very considerable.], and Rhodiopolis [The remains of Rhodiopolis were found by Spratt and Forbes in the vicinity of Corydalla.]. Near the sea is Limyra [On the Limyrus, probably the modern Phineka; the ruins to the north of which are supposed to be those of Limyra.] with a river of like name, into which the Arycandus flows, Mount Masycites [The modern Akhtar Dagh.], the state of Andriaca [Now Andraki. This was the port of Myra, next mentioned. It stood at the mouth of the river now known as the Andraki. Cramer observes that it was here St. Paul was put on board the ship of Alexandria, Acts xxvii. 5, 6.], Myra [Still called Myra by the Greeks, but Dembre by the Turks. It was built on a rock twenty stadia from the sea. St. Paul touched here on his voyage as a prisoner to Rome, and from the mention made of it in Acts xxvii. 5, 6, it would appear to have been an important sea-port. There are magnificent ruins of this city still to be seen, in part hewn out of the solid rock.], the towns of Aperræ [From an inscription found by Cockerell at the head of the Hassac Bay, it is thought that Aperlæ is the proper name of this place, though again there are coins of Gordian which give the name as Aperræ. It is fixed by the Stadismus as sixty stadia west of Somena, which Leake supposes to be the same as the Simena mentioned above by Pliny.] and Antiphellos [Now called Antephelo or Andifilo, on the south coast of Lycia, at the head of a bay. Its theatre is still complete, with the exception of the proscenium. There are also other interesting remains of antiquity.], formerly called Habessus, and in a corner Phellos [Fellowes places the site of Phellos near a village called Saaret, west-north-west of Antiphellos, where he found the remains of a town; but Spratt considers this to mark the site of the Pyrra of Pliny, mentioned above—judging from Pliny’s words. Modern geographers deem it more consistent with his meaning to look for Phellos north of Antiphellos than in any other direction, and the ruins at Tchookoorbye, north of Antiphellos, on the spur of a mountain called Fellerdagh, are thought to be those of Phellos.], after which comes Pyrra, and then the city of Xanthus [The most famous city of Lycia. It stood on the western bank of the river of that name, now called the Echen Chai. It was twice besieged, and on both occasions the inhabitants destroyed themselves with their property, first by the Persians under Harpagus, and afterwards by the Romans under Brutus. Among its most famous temples were those of Sarpedon and of the Lycian Apollo. The ruins now known by the name of Gunik, have been explored by Sir C. Fellows and other travellers, and a portion of its remains are now to be seen in the British Museum, under the name of the Xanthian marbles.], fifteen miles from the sea, as also a river known by the same name. We then come to Patara [Its ruins still bear the same name. It was a flourishing seaport, on a promontory of the same name, sixty stadia east of the mouth of the Xanthus. It was early colonized by the Dorians from Crete, and became a chief seat of the worship of Apollo, from whose son Patarus it was said to have received its name. Ptolemy Philadelphus enlarged it, and called it Arsinoë, but it still remained better known by its old name. This place was visited by St. Paul, who thence took ship for Phœnicia. See Acts xxi. 1.], formerly Pataros, and Sidyma, situate on a mountain. Next comes the Promontory of Cragus [This was more properly the name of a mountain district of Lycia. Strabo speaks of Cragus, a mountain with eight summits, and a city of the same name. Beaufort thinks that Yedy-Booroon, the Seven Capes, a group of high and rugged mountains, appear to have been the ancient Mount Cragus of Lycia.], and beyond it a gulf [Probably the Gulf of Macri, equal in size to the Gulf of Satalia, which is next to it.], equal to the one that comes before it; upon it are Pinara [This place lay in the interior at the base of Cragus, and its ruins are still to be seen on the east side of the range, about half-way between Telmessus and the termination of the range on the south coast.], and Telmessus [Its ruins are to be seen at Mei, or the modern port of Macri.], the frontier town of Lycia.

Lycia formerly contained seventy towns, now it has but thirty-six. Of these, the most celebrated, besides those already mentioned, are Canas [Its site is unknown. That of Candyba has been ascertained to be a place called Gendevar, east of the Xanthus, and a few miles from the coast. Its rock-tombs are said to be beautifully executed. The Œnian grove or forest, it has been suggested, may still be recognized in the extensive pine forest that now covers the mountain above the city. The sites of Podalia and Choma seem to be unknown.], Candyba, so celebrated for the Œnian Grove, Podalia, Choma, past which the river Ædesa flows, Cyaneæ [In some editions “Cyane.” Leake says that this place was discovered to the west of Andriaca by Cockerell. It appears from Scott and Forbes’s account of Lycia, that three sites have been found between port Tristorus and the inland valley of Kassabar, which from the inscriptions appeared anciently to have borne this name, Yarvoo, Ghiouristan, and Toussa. The former is the chief place and is covered with ruins of the Roman and middle-age construction. At Ghiouristan there are Lycian rock-tombs.], Ascandalis, Amelas, Noscopium, Tlos [Its ruins are to be seen near the modern Doover, in the interior of Lycia, about two miles and a half east of the river Xanthus. Of the three places previously mentioned the sites appear to be unknown.], and Telandrus [Mentioned by the geographer Stephanus as being in Caria.]. It includes also in the interior the district of Cabalia, the three cities of which are Œnianda, Balbura [Its site is fixed at Katara, on both sides of the Katara Su, the most northern branch of the Xanthus. The ruins are very considerable, lying on both sides of the stream. Balbura is a neuter plural.], and Bubon [It lay to the west of Balbura, near a place now called Ebajik, on a small stream that flows into the Horzoom Tchy. In B. xxxv. c. 17, Pliny mentions a kind of chalk found in the vicinity of this place. Its ruins are still to be seen, but they are not striking.].

On passing Telmessus we come to the Asiatic or Carpathian Sea, and the district which is properly called Asia. Agrippa has divided this region into two parts; one of which he has bounded on the east by Phrygia and Lycaonia, on the west by the Ægean Sea, on the south by the Egyptian Sea, and on the north by Paphlagonia, making its length to be 473 miles and its breadth 320. The other part he has bounded by the Lesser Armenia on the east, Phrygia, Lycaonia, and Pamphylia on the west, the province of Pontus on the north, and the Sea of Pamphylia on the south, making it 575 miles in length and 325 in breadth.

### Chap. 29.—Caria.

Upon the adjoining coast is Caria [In the south-west corner of Asia Minor, bounded on the north and north-east by the mountains Messagis and Cadmus, dividing it from Lydia and Phrygia, and adjoining to Phrygia and Lycia on the south-east.], then Ionia, and beyond it Æolis. Caria surrounds Doris, which lies in the middle, and runs down on both sides of it to the sea. In it [Caria.] is the Promontory of Pedalium [Now Cape Ghinazi. It was also called Artemisium, from the temple of Artemis or Diana situate upon it.], the river Glaucus [Discharging itself into the bay of Telmissus, now Makri.], into which the Telmedium [“Telmissus” is the reading here in some editions.] discharges itself, the towns of Dædala [Situate in the district of Caria called Peræa. It was also the name given to a mountainous district. In Hoskyn’s map the ruins of Dædala are placed near the head of the Gulf of Glaucus, on the west of a small river called Inegi Chai, probably the ancient Ninus, where Dædalus was bitten by a water-snake, in consequence of which he died.], Crya [On the Gulf of Glaucus: Stephanus however places it in Lycia. Mela speaks only of a promontory of this name.], peopled by fugitives, the river Axon [Leake places this river immediately west of the Gulf of Glaucus.], and the town of Calynda [Placed by Strabo sixty stadia from the sea, west of the Gulf of Glaucus, and east of Carinus. Its site is uncertain, but it may possibly be the place discovered by Fellows, which is proved by inscriptions to have been called Cadyanda, a name otherwise unknown to us. This lies N.N.E. of Makri, on the Gulf of Glaucus or Makri, at a place called Hoozoomlee, situate on an elevated plain.].

(28.) The river Indus [The same as the river Calbis of Strabo and Mela, at present the Dalamon Tchy, Quingi or Taas, having its sources in Mount Cadmus above Cibyra. It was said to have derived its name from an Indian, who had been thrown into it from an elephant.], which rises in the mountains of the Cibyratæ [Their district was Cibyratis, of which the chief city was Cibyra. This place, uniting with the towns of Balbura, Bubon, and Œnianda, had the name of Tetrapolis; of which league Cibyra was the head, mustering 30,000 infantry and 2000 cavalry. The iron found in this district was easily cut with a chisel or other sharp tool. The site of this powerful city has been ascertained to be at Horzoom, on the Horzoom Tchy, a branch of the Dalamon Tchy or Indus. The ruins are very extensive, and the theatre in fine preservation.], receives sixty-five rivers which are constantly flowing, besides upwards of 100 mountain torrents. Here is the free town of Caunos [Placed by Strabo west of Calynda. The ancient descriptions of its locality vary, but the place now known as Kaiguez is said to denote its site. The Caunii are frequently mentioned in the Persian, Grecian, and Roman histories. It was noted for its dried figs, mentioned by Pliny in B. xv. c. 19.], then the town of Pyrnos [Supposed by Mannert to be the Physcus of Strabo and the Phuscæ of Ptolemy.], the port of Cressa [Leake says that this harbour is now called Aplothíka by the Greeks, and Porto Cavaliere by the Italians, lie also says that on its western shore are the ruins of an Hellenic fortress and town, which are undoubtedly those of Loryma.], from which the island of Rhodes is distant twenty miles; the place where Loryma formerly stood, the towns of Tisanusa [It had a port of the same name.], Paridion [Called Pandion by Mela, according to Parisot.], and Larymna [Parisot suggests that it is the same as Loryma previously mentioned.], the Gulf of Thymnias [Like the Gulf of Schœnus, a portion probably of the Dorian Gulf, now the Gulf of Syme.], the Promontory of Aphrodisias [The modern name of this promontory is not given by Hamilton, who sailed round it. It has been confounded with the Cynos Sema of Strabo, now Capo Velo. The site of Hyda or Hyde is unknown.], the town of Hyda, the Gulf of Schœnus, and the district of Bubasus [There was a town of this name as well. Stephen of Byzantium tells us that it received its name from a shepherd who saved the life of Podalirius, when shipwrecked on the coast of Caria.]. There was formerly the town of Acanthus here, another name of which was Dulopolis. We then come to Cnidos [Part of it was situate on an island now called Cape Krio, connected by a causeway with the mainland. Its site is covered with ruins of a most interesting character in every direction. The Triopian promontory, evidently alluded to by Pliny, is the modern Cape Krio.], a free town, situate on a promontory, Triopia [It has been remarked that in his description here Pliny is very brief and confused, and that he may intend to give the name of Triopia either to the small peninsula or island, or may include in this term the western part of the whole of the larger peninsula.], and after that the towns of Pegusa and Stadia.

At this last town Doris begins; but, first, it may be as well to describe the districts that lie to the back of Caria and the several jurisdictions in the interior. The first of these [Of these conventus. For an account of Cibyra see last page.] is called Cibyratica, Cibyra being a town of Phrygia. Twenty-five states resort to it for legal purposes, together with the most famous city of Laodicea [On the Lycus, now known as the Choruk-Su. By different writers it has been assigned to Lydia, Caria, and Phrygia, but in the ultimate division of the Roman provinces it was assigned to the Greater Phrygia. It was founded by Antiochus II. on the site of a previous town, and named in honour of his wife Laodice. Its site is occupied by ruins of great magnificence. In the Apostolic age it was the seat of a flourishing Christian Church, which however very soon gave signs of degeneracy, as we learn from St. John’s Epistle to it, Revel. ii. 14-22. St. Paul also addresses it in common with the neighbouring church of Colossæ. Its site is now called Eski-Hissar, or the Old Castle.].

(29.) This place at first bore the name of Diospolis, and after that of Rhoas, and is situate on the river Lycus, the Asopus and the Caprus [A tributary of the Phrygian Mæander.] washing its sides. The other people belonging to the same jurisdiction, whom it may be not amiss to mention, are the Hydrelitæ [The people of Hydrela, a town of Caria, said to have been founded by one of three brothers who emigrated from Sparta.], the Themisones [The people of Themisonium, now called Tseni.], and the Hierapolitæ [The people of Hierapolis, a town of Phrygia, situate on a height between the rivers Lycus and Mæander, about five miles north of Laodicea, on the road from Apamea to Sardis. It was celebrated for its warm springs, and its Plutonium, or cave of Pluto, from which issued a mephitic vapour of a poisonous nature; see B. ii. c.. The Christian Church here is alluded to by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Colossians, iv. 13. Its ruins are situate at an uninhabited place called Pambuk-Kalessi.]. The second jurisdiction receives its title from Synnas [Situate in the north of Phrygia Salutaris; its ruins being probably those to be seen at Afiour-Kara-Hisar. From the time of Constantine this place became the capital of Phrygia Salutaris. It stood in a fruitful plain, near a mountain quarry of the celebrated Synnadic marble, which was white with red veins and spots. This marble was also called “Docimiticus,” from Docimia, a nearer place.]; to it resort the Lycaones [As already mentioned in C. of the present Book.], the Appiani [The site of Appia does not appear to be known. Cicero speaks of an application made to him by the Appiani, when he was governor of Cilicia, respecting the taxes with which they were burdened, and the buildings of their town.], the Eucarpeni [Eucarpia was a town of Phrygia, not far from the sources of the Mæander, on the road from Dorylæum to Apamea Cibotus. The vine grew there in great luxuriance, and to its fruitfulness the town probably owed its name. Kiepert places it in the vicinity of Segielar, but its exact site is unknown.], the Dorylæi [The site of Dorylæum is now called Eski-Shehr. The hot-baths here are mentioned by Athenæus, and its waters were pleasant to the taste. Sheep-feeding appears to have been carried on here to a great extent, and under the Greek empire it was a flourishing place. The site of Midæum does not seem to be known.], the Midæi, the Julienses [The people of Julia, Juliopolis, or Julianopolis, a town of Lydia, probably to the south of Mount Tmolus.], and fifteen other peoples of no note. The third jurisdiction has its seat at Apamea [This place was built near Celænæ by Antiochus Soter, and named after his mother Apama. Strabo says that it lay at the mouth of the river Marsyas. Its site has been fixed at the modern Denair. Some ancient ruins are to be seen.], formerly called Celænæ [Pliny commits an error here; Celænæ was a different place from Apamea, though close to it.], and after that Cibotos. This place is situate at the foot of Mount Signia, the Marsyas, the Obrima, and the Orga, rivers which fall into the Mæander, flowing past it. Here the Marsyas, rising from the earth, again makes its appearance, but soon after buries itself once more at Aulocrenæ [Meaning the “Fountains of the Pipe,” and probably deriving its name from the legend here mentioned by Pliny, and in B. xvi. c. 44. Strabo describes the Marsyas and Mæander as rising, according to report, in one lake above Celænæ, which produced reeds adapted for making the mouth-pieces of musical instruments, but he gives no name to the lake. Hamilton found near Denair or Apamea, a lake nearly two miles in circumference, full of reeds and rushes, which he looks upon as the lake on the mountain Aulocrene, described by Pliny in the 31st Chapter of the present Book. His account however is very confused, as he mentions on different occasions a region of Aulocrene, a valley of Aulocrene, and a mountain of Aulocrene.], the spot where Marsyas had the musical contest with Apollo as to superiority of skill in playing on the flute. Aulocrenæ is the name given to a valley which lies ten miles on the road towards Phrygia from Apamea. As belonging to this jurisdiction, it may be as well to mention the Metropolitæ [People of “the Mother City,” said by Stephen of Byzantium to have received that name from Cybele, the Mother of the Gods.], the Dionysopolitæ [Nothing is known of the site of Dionysopolis. It is mentioned in a letter of Cicero’s to his brother Quintus, in which he speaks of the people of this place as being very hostile to the latter.], the Euphorbeni [The site of Euphorbium is denoted, according to Leake, by the modern Sandukli. It lay between Synnas and Apamea, and not improbably, like Eucarpia, received its name from the fertility of its territory.], the Acmonenses [The site of Acmona has been fixed at Ahatkoi, but it seems doubtful.], the Pelteni [The site of Pelta is by D’Anville called Ris-Chak or Hou-Chak.], and the Silbiani [The people of Silbium or Silbia, near Metropolis.], besides nine other nations of no note.

Upon the Gulf of Doris [The Dorian settlements on the coast of Caria were so called. The Dorian Gulf was probably the Sinus Ceramicus mentioned below.] we have Leucopolis, Hamaxitos, Eleus, and Euthene [Of these places nothing whatever seems to be known.]. We then come to Pitaium, Eutane [Pitaium and Eutane seem to be unknown.], and Halicarnassus [A member of the Dorian Hexapolis, or League of the Six Cities. The site of this famous city is occupied by the modern Boodroum, and its ruins are very extensive. It was famous as being the birth-place of the two historians Herodotus and Dionysius. It was the largest and best fortified city of Caria.], towns of Caria. To the jurisdiction of this last place six towns were appended by Alexander the Great, Theangela [According to Parisot the site of this place is now called Angeli and Karabaglas.], Sibde, Medmasa, Euralium, Pedasus, and Telmissus [This place must not be confounded with Telmessus or Telmissus in Lycia, which has been previously mentioned. It was situate six miles from Halicarnassus. Of the other places here mentioned nothing seems to be known.]. Halicarnassus lies between two gulfs, those of Ceramus [Now the Gulf of Staneo, Kos, or Boodroum. It took its name from the port of Ceramus, now Keramo, according to D’Anville.] and Iasus [Now the Gulf of Mandeliyeh. It took its name from the city of Iasus, the site of which is now called Askem or Asyn-Kalessi.]. We then come to Myndos [Its ruins are to be seen at the port called Gumishlu. This was a Dorian colony on the coast of Caria, founded probably on the site of the old town of the Leleges.], and the former site of Palæomyndos; also Nariandos, Neapolis [It has been suggested that this was only another name for the new town of Myndos, in contradistinction to Palæomyndos, or “old Myndos.”], Caryanda [Scylax the geographer is supposed to have been a native of this place. The town is supposed to have been built partly on the mainland and partly on an island. Pastra Limani is supposed to have been the harbour of Caryanda.], the free town of Termera [A Dorian city on the Promontory of Termerium.], Bargyla [Situate near Iasus and Myndos. Leake conjectures that it may have been on the bay between Pastra Limâne and Asyn Kalesi. There was a statue here of Artemis Cindyas, under the bare sky, of which the incredible story was told that neither rain nor snow ever fell on it.], and the town of Iasus [See note on the last page.], from which the Iasian Gulf takes its name.

Caria is especially distinguished for the fame of its places in the interior; for here are Mylasa [Its ruins are to be seen at the spot still called Melasso. It was a very flourishing city, eight miles from the coast of the Gulf of Iasus, and situate at the foot of a rock of fine white marble. It was partly destroyed in the Roman civil wars by Labienus. Its ruins are very extensive.], a free town, and that of Antiochia [Hamilton has fixed the site of this place between four and five miles south-east of Kuyuja, near the mouth of the valley of the Kara-Su. The surrounding district was famous for the excellence of its figs. The city was built by Antiochus, the son of Seleucus.], on the site of the former towns of Symmæthos and Cranaos: it is now surrounded by the rivers Mæander [Now called the Mendereh or Meinder.] and Orsinus [Pococke thinks that the present Jenjer is the Orsinus, while Mannert takes it to be the Hadchizik, a little winding river that falls into the Mæander.]. In this district also was formerly Mæandropolis [Now called Guzel-Hissar, according to Ansart.]; we find also Eumenia [On the road from Dorylæum to Apamea. It is said to have received its name from Attalus II., who named the town after his brother and predecessor Eumenes II. Its site is known as Ishekle, and it is still marked by numerous ruins and sculptures.], situate on the river Cludros, the river Glaucus [A tributary of the Mæander. Its modern name is not mentioned.], the town of Lysias and Orthosa [Mannert takes the ruins to be seen at Jegni-Chehr to be those of ancient Orthosia. The town of Lysias does not appear to have been identified.], the district of Berecynthus [The situation of this district is not known. See B. xvi. c. 16, where it appears that this region was famous for its boxwood.], Nysa [One of the numerous places of that name devoted to the worship of Bacchus. It was built on both sides of the ravine of the brook Eudon, which fell into the Mæander. Its ruins are to be seen at Sultan-Hissar, a little to the west of Hazeli.], and Tralles [Its ruins are to be seen at Ghiuzel-Hissar, near Aidin. This was a flourishing commercial city, included sometimes in Ionia, sometimes in Caria. It stood on the banks of the Eudon, a tributary of the river Mæander. Under the Seleucidæ it was called Antiochia and Seleucia.], also called Euanthia [From the beauty and fertility of the surrounding country.], Seleucia, and Antiochia: it is washed by the river Eudon, while the Thebais runs through it. Some authors say that a nation of Pygmies formerly dwelt here. Besides the preceding towns, there are Thydonos, Pyrrha [An Ionic town of Caria, on the north side of the Sinus Latmicus, fifty stadia from the mouth of the Mæander.], Eurome [Or Euromus, a town of Caria, at the foot of Mount Grion, which runs parallel with Latmos. Ruins of a temple to the north-west of Alabanda are considered to belong to Euromus.], Heraclea [A town of uncertain site. It must not be confounded with the place of the same name, mentioned in c. of the present Book.], Amyzon [The ruins of its citadel and walls still exist on the east side of Mount Latmos, on the road from Bafi to Tchisme.], the free town of Alabanda [Situate about twenty miles south of Tralles. The modern site is doubtful, but Arab Hissa, on a branch of the Mæander, now called the Tchina, is supposed to represent Alabanda. It was notorious for the luxuriousness of its inhabitants. A stone found in the vicinity was used for making glass and glazing vessels. See B. xxxvi. c. 13.], which has given name to that jurisdiction, the free town of Stratonicea [Built by Antiochus I. Soter, and named, in honour of his wife, Stratonice. It stood south of Alabanda, near the river Marsyas. It is supposed that it stood on the site of a former city called Idrias, and still earlier, Chrysaoris.], Hynidos, Ceramus [D’Anville identifies it with a place called Keramo, but no such place appears to be known. Strabo places it near the sea between Cnidus and Halicarnassus, and Ceramus comes next after Cnidus. Ptolemy seems to place it on the south side of the bay. Of Hynidos nothing appears to be known.], Trœzene [Its situation is unknown; but there can be little doubt that it was founded by the Dorians who emigrated to the coast of Asia Minor from Argolis and Trœzene in the Peloponnesus. Phorontis appears to be unknown.], and Phorontis. At a greater distance [Parisot observes that many of the towns here mentioned belonged to the northern part of Phrygia.], but resorting to the same place of jurisdiction, are the Orthronienses, the Alindienses [The people of Alinda in Caria, which was surrendered to Alexander the Great by Alinda, queen of Caria. It was one of the strongest places in Caria. Its position has been fixed by Fellowes at Demmeergee-derasy, between Arab-Hissa and Karpuslee, on a steep rock.] or Hippini, the Xystiani [Of Xystis, as also of Hydissa, nothing appears to be known.], the Hydissenses, the Apolloniatæ [Inhabitants of Apollonia in Caria, of which place nothing appears to be known.], the Trapezopolitæ [Pococke says that the modern site of Trapezopolis is called Karadche.], and the Aphrodisienses [The people of Aphrodisias, an ancient city of Caria, situate at the modern Ghera or Geyra, south of Antiochia on the Mæander. Aphrodite or Venus seems to have been principally worshipped at this place. Strabo places it in Phrygia.], a free people. Besides the above, there are the towns of Coscinus [Or Coscinia, a place in Caria, which, as we may gather from Strabo, ranked below a town. Leake thinks that Tshina, where Pococke found considerable remains, is the site of this place.], and Harpasa [On the eastern bank of the Harpasus, a tributary of the Mæander. Its ruins are supposed to be those seen at a place called Harpas Kalessi. In B. ii. c., Pliny speaks of a wonderful rock at this place.], situate on the river Harpasus [Now known as the Harpa.], which also passed the town of Trallicon when it was in existence.
