---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 76-100."
chapter_order: 179
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 76.—The Rhamnos; Two Varieties of It: Five Remedies.

Among the several kinds [In reality, as Fée says, there is no botanical affinity between the Rubus, or bramble, and the Rhamnus.] of bramble is reckoned the plant called “rhamnos” by the Greeks. One variety of it is whiter [Sprengel identifies this plant with the Zizyphus vulgaris of Linnæus, the jujube, and Desfontaines is of the same opinion. Fée, however, takes it to be the Rhamnus saxatilis of Linnæus, the rock buckthorn.] than the other, and has a more shrublike appearance, throwing out branches armed with straight thorns, and not hooked, like those of the other kinds; the leaves too are larger. The other kind, [Identified by some authorities with the Paliurus aculeatus of Decandolles, mentioned in c. 71. Sprengel is in doubt whether it may not be the Rhamnus lycioides of Linnæus.] which is found growing wild, is of a more swarthy hue, in some measure inclining to red; it bears too a sort [Not a characteristic, Fée says, of the genus Rhamnus of modern Botany.] of pod. With the root of it boiled in water a medicament is made, known as “lycium:” [Or “Lycian” extract. See B. xii. c. 15.] the seed of it is useful for bringing away the after-birth. The white kind, however, is of a more astringent and cooling nature, and better adapted for the treatment of gatherings and wounds. The leaves of both kinds, either raw or boiled, are employed topically with oil.

### Chap. 77.—Lycium: Eighteen Remedies.

The best lycium, [See B. xii. c. 15. Fée identifies this with the modern Catechu, a decoction from the Acacia catechu, a leguminous plant of the East Indies.] they say, is that prepared from the thorn of that name, known also as the “Chironian pyxacanthus,” [The Rhamnus lycioides of Linnæus, our buckthorn. The Indian plant from which catechu is extracted is of a similar nature. See B. xii. c. 15.] and mentioned by us when speaking of the trees of India, the lycium of those regions being generally looked upon as by far the best. The branches and roots, which are intensely bitter, [This Fée looks upon as an exaggeration.] are first pounded and then boiled for three days in a copper vessel, after which the woody parts are removed, and the decoction is boiled again, till it has attained the consistency of honey. It is adulterated with various bitter extracts, [See B. xii. c. 15.] as also with amurca of olive oil and ox-gall. The froth or flower [I.e. the choice part of it; see B. xii. c. 15. Catechu is adulterated at the present day with starch and argillaceous earths. As a medicament it is not possessed of a very powerful action.] of this decoction is used as an ingredient in compositions for the eyes: and the other part of it is employed as a cosmetic for the face, and for the cure of itch-scabs, corroding sores in the corners of the eyes, inveterate fluxes, and suppurations of the ears. It is useful too for diseases of the tonsillary glands and gums, for coughs, and for discharges of blood from the mouth, being generally taken in pieces the size of a bean. For the cure of discharges from wounds, it is applied to the part affected; and it is similarly used for chaps, ulcerations of the genitals, excoriations, ulcers, whether putrid, serpiginous, or of recent date, hard excrescences [“Clavos.”] of the nostrils, and suppurations. It is taken also by females, in milk, for the purpose of arresting the catamenia when in excess.

The Indian lycium is distinguished from the other kinds by its colour, the lumps being black outside, and, when broken, red within, though they turn black very quickly. [This statement is quite correct.] It is bitter and remarkably astringent, and is employed for all the purposes above mentioned, diseases of the generative organs in particular.

### Chap. 78.—Sarcocolla: Two Remedies.

Some authors are of opinion that sarcocolla [See B. xiii. c. 20.] is a tearlike gum which exudes from a kind of thorn; [The Penæa sarcocolla is not a thorny tree.] it is similar to powdered incense in appearance, has a sweet flavour with a slight degree of bitter, and is of the consistency of gum. Pounded in wine, it arrests defluxions, and is used as a topical application for infants more particularly. This substance too becomes black [Fée says that this is not the case. It is no longer used in medicine.] when old; the whiter it is, the more highly it is esteemed.

### Chap. 79.—Oporice: Two Remedies.

We are indebted too to the medicinal properties of trees for one very celebrated medicament, known as “oporice.” [Or conserve of fruits. An electuary.] This preparation is used for dysentery and various affections of the stomach; the following being the method of preparing it. Five quinces, seeds and all, with the same number of pomegranates, one sextarius of sorbs, a similar quantity of Syrian rhus, [Seed of the sumach. See B. xiii. c. 13.] and half an ounce of saffron, are boiled in one congius of white grape-juice at a slow heat, till the whole mixture is reduced to the consistency of honey.

### Chap. 80.—The Trixago, Chamædrys, Chamædrops, or Teucria: Sixteen Remedies.

We shall now add to these plants, certain vegetable productions to which the Greeks have given names belonging to trees, so that it would be doubtful whether they themselves are not trees as well.

(15.) The chamædrys [“Ground oak.” See B. xiv. c. 19; where it is identified with the Teucrium chamædrys of Linnæus. Littré, however, informs us, that M. Fraäs considers it to be the Teucrium lucidum of Linnæus; because, as we learn from Dioscorides, it grows on rocky places, is a remarkably diminutive shrub, and has a fine odour, all of which are characteristics of the latter plant, and not of the Teucrium chamædrys, commonly known as the dwarf oak or germander.] is the same plant that in Latin is called “trixago;” some persons, however, call it “chamædrops,” and others “teucria.” The leaves of it are the size of those of mint, but in their colour and indentations they resemble those of the oak. According to some, the leaves are serrated, and it was these, they say, that first suggested the idea of the saw: [An invention attributed to Dædalus, in B. vii. c. 57.] the flower of it borders closely upon purple. This plant is gathered in rough craggy localities, when it is replete with juice; and, whether taken [The Teucrium chamædrys is a bitter plant, which has been successfully used for fever, and it acts as a tonic and vermifuge. Beyond these, it has no medicinal properties whatever.] internally or applied topically, it is extremely efficacious for the stings of venomous serpents, diseases of the stomach, inveterate coughs, collections of phlegm in the throat, ruptures, convulsions, and pains in the sides. It diminishes the volume of the spleen, and acts as a diuretic and emmenagogue; for which reasons it is very useful in incipient dropsy, the usual dose being a handful of the sprigs boiled down to one third in three heminæ of water. Lozenges too are made of it for the above-named purposes, by bruising it in water. In combination with honey, it heals abscesses and inveterate or sordid ulcers: a wine [See B. xiv. c. 19.] too is prepared from it for diseases of the chest. The juice of the leaves, mixed with oil, disperses films on the eyes; it is taken also, in vinegar, for diseases of the spleen; employed as a friction, it is of a warming nature.

### Chap. 81.—The Chamædaphne: Five Remedies.

The chamædaphne [Or “ground-laurel.” Fée considers this to be identical with the Alexandrian laurel, mentioned in B. xv. c. 39. It is no longer used in medicine, but the roots of a plant of kindred nature, the Ruseus aculeatus, or butcher’s broom, are diuretic.] consists of a single diminutive stem, about a cubit in height, the limbs of it being smaller than those of the laurel. These leaves \* \* \* The seed, which is of a red colour, and attached to the leaves, is applied fresh for head-ache, is of a cooling nature for burning heats, and is taken for griping pains in the bowels, with wine. The juice of this plant, taken in wine, acts as an emmenagogue and diuretic; and applied as a pessary in wool, it facilitates laborious deliveries.

### Chap. 82.—The Chamelæa: Six Remedies.

The leaves of the chamelæa [Or “ground olive.” See B. xiii. c. 35.] resemble those of the olive; they are bitter, however, and odoriferous. This plant is found growing in craggy localities, and never exceeds a palm in height. It is of a purgative [This, Fée says, is consistent with modern experience; indeed it is drastic to a dangerous extent.] nature, and carries off phlegm and bile; for which purposes, the leaves are boiled with twice the quantity of wormwood, and the decoction taken with honey. The leaves, applied to ulcers, have a detergent effect. It is said, that if a person gathers it before sunrise, taking care to mention that he is gathering it for the cure of white specks [“Albugines.”] in the eyes, and then wears it as an amulet, it will effect a cure: as also that, gathered in any way, it is beneficial for the eyes of beasts of burden and cattle.

### Chap. 83.—The Chamæsyce: Eight Remedies.

The chamæsyce [Or “ground fig.” The Euphorbia chamæsyce, or annual spurge.] has leaves similar to those of the lentil, and lying close to the ground; it is found growing in dry, rocky, localities. A decoction of it in wine is remarkably useful as a liniment for improving [The juices are irritating and acrid, and would in reality be highly dangerous to the eyes.] the sight, and for dispersing cataract, cicatrizations, films, and cloudiness of the eyes. Applied in a pledget of linen, as a pessary, it allays pains in the uterus; and used topically [Owing to its caustic powers, it really is good for the removal of warts.] it removes warts and excrescences of all kinds. It is very useful also for hardness of breathing.

### Chap. 84.—The Chamæcissos: One Remedy.

The chamæcissos [Or “ground-ivy.” See B. xvi. c. 62, and c. 49 of this Book.] has ears like [Fée says that this comparison is not strictly correct.] those of wheat, with numerous leaves, and small branches, about five in number. When in blossom it might almost be taken for the white violet: the root of it is diminutive. For sciatica, the leaves of it are taken, seven days consecutively, in doses of three oboli, in two cyathi of wine: this is a very bitter potion, however.

### Chap. 85.—The Chamæleuce, Farfarum, or Farfugium: One Remedy.

The chamæleuce [The “ground-poplar.” See B. xxvi. c.. Identified with the Tussilago farfara of Linnæus; our colt’s-foot.] is known among us as the “farfarum” or “farfugium:” it grows on the banks of rivers, and has a leaf like that of the poplar, only larger. The root of it is burnt upon cypress charcoal, and, by the aid of a funnel, [Or “tube”—“infundibulum.” Colt’s-foot is still smoked, either by itself or in conjunction with tobacco. Fée says, however, that to inhale the smoke in the manner here described, would be enough to create a cough if it did not exist before.] the smoke inhaled, in cases of inveterate cough.

### Chap. 86.—The Chamæpeuce: Five Remedies. The Chamæcyparissos: Two Remedies. The Ampeloprason; Six Remedies. The Stachys: One Remedy.

The chamæpeuce [“Ground-pine” or “ground pitch-tree.” Identified by Sprengel with the Stohelina chamæpeuce of Willdenow, a corymbiferous plant of the Isle of Candia.] has a leaf which resembles that of the larch, and is useful more particularly for lumbago and pains in the back. The chamæcyparissos [“Ground-cypress.” Identified with the Euphorbia cyparissias of Linnæus, the cypress spurge. Taken internally, it is a corrosive poison.] is a herb which, taken in wine, counteracts the venom of serpents of all kinds, and of scorpions.

The ampeloprason [Or “vine-leek.” The Allium ampeloprason of Linnæus, the great round-headed garlic. It is no longer used in medicine, and all that Pliny states as to its medicinal properties is quite unfounded, Fée says.] is found growing in vineyards; it has leaves like those of the leek, and produces offensive eructations. It is highly efficacious for the stings of serpents, and acts as an emmenagogue and diuretic. Taken in drink or applied externally, it arrests discharges of blood from the generative organs. It is prescribed also for females after delivery, and is used for bites inflicted by dogs.

The plant known as “stachys” bears a strong resemblance also to a leek, [Fée thinks that Pliny has committed an error here, and that the word “marrubii” should be substituted, our “horehound.” He identifies it with the Stachys Germanica of Linnæus, or base horehound; which is more commonly found in the South of Europe than in Germany.] but the leaves of it are longer and more numerous. It has an agreeable smell, and in colour inclines to yellow. It promotes menstruation.

### Chap. 87.—The Clinopodion, Cleonicion, Zopyron, or Ocimoïdes: Three Remedies.

The clinopodion, [Or “bed-foot.” The Clinopodium vulgare of Linnæus, our wild basil. It has some useful properties attributed to it; but what Pliny here states respecting it is erroneous.] cleonicion, zopyron, or ocimoïdes, resembles wild thyme in appearance. The stem of it is tough and ligneous, and it is a palm in height. It grows in stony soils, and the leaves are trained regularly around the stem, [This seems to be the meaning of “orbiculato foliorum ambitu.”] which resembles a bed-post in appearance. This plant is taken in drink, for convulsions, ruptures, strangury, and wounds inflicted by serpents: a decoction is also made of it, and the juice is similarly employed.

### Chap. 88.—The Clematis Centunculus; Three Remedies.

We shall now have to annex some plants, of a marvellous nature no doubt, but not so well known, reserving those of a higher reputation for the succeeding Books.

Our people give the name of “centunculus,” [Turner and C. Bauhin identify it with the Gnaphalium Germanicum of Lamarck, and Sprengel with the Polygonum convolvulus of Linnæus. If so, Fée says, the synonym here given by Pliny is erroneous; for the Greek clematis, there can be little doubt, is the Clematis cirrhosa of Linnæus. See the account given of the Gnaphalion in B. xxvii. c. 61.] to a creeping plant that grows in the fields, the leaves of which bear a strong resemblance to the hoods attached to our cloaks. By the Greeks it is known as the “clematis.” Taken in astringent wine it is wonderfully effectual for arresting [All that Pliny states as to its medicinal properties, Fée says, is erroneous.] diarrhœa: beaten up, in doses of one denarius, in five cyathi of oxymel or of warm water, it arrests hæmorrhage, and facilitates the after-birth.

### Chap. 89.—The Clematis Echites, or Lagine.

The Greeks have other varieties also of the clematis, one of which is known as “echites” [Probably the Asclepias nigra of Linnæus, black swallow-wort.] or “lagine,” and by some as the “little scammony.” Its stems are about two feet in height, and covered with leaves: in general appearance it is not unlike scammony, were it not that the leaves are darker and more diminutive; it is found growing in vineyards and cultivated soils. It is eaten as a vegetable, with oil and salt, and acts as a laxative upon the bowels. It is taken [The Asclepias nigra has no such medicinal effects as those mentioned by Pliny.] also for dysentery, with linseed, in astringent wine. The leaves of this plant are applied with polenta for defluxions of the eyes, the part affected being first covered with a pledget of wet linen. Applied to scrofulous sores, they cause them to suppurate, and if some axle-grease is then applied, a perfect cure will be effected. They are applied also to piles, with green oil, and are good for phthisis, in combination with honey. Taken with the food, they increase the milk in nursing women, and, rubbed upon the heads of infants, they promote the rapid growth of the hair. Eaten with vinegar, they act as an aphrodisiac.

### Chap. 90.—The Egyptian Clematis, Daphnoïdes, or Polygonoïdes: Two Remedies.

There is another kind also, known as the “Egyptian” [The Vinca major and Vinca minor of Linnæus, the greater and smaller periwinkle. Fée is at a loss to know why it should be called “Egyptian,” as it is a plant of Europe.] clematis, otherwise as “daphnoïdes” [“Laurel-shaped” and “many-cornered.”] or “polygonoïdes:” it has a leaf like that of the laurel, and is long and slender. Taken in vinegar, it is very useful for the stings of serpents, that of the asp in particular.

### Chap. 91. (16.)—Different Opinions on the Dracontium.

It is Egypt more particularly that produces the clematis known as the “aron,” of which we have already [In B. xix. c. 30.] made some mention when speaking of the bulbs. Respecting this plant and the dracontium, there have been considerable differences of opinion. Some writers, indeed, have maintained that they are identical, and Glaucias has made the only distinction between them in reference to the place of their growth, assuming that the dracontium is nothing else than the aron in a wild state. Some persons, again, have called the root “aron,” and the stem of the plant “dracontium:” but if the dracontium is the same as the one known to us as the “dracunculus,” [Fée says that the Dracontion of the Greeks and the Dracunculus of the Latins are identical, being represented in modern Botany by the Arum dracunculus of Linnæus, the common dragon.] it is a different plant altogether; for while the aron has a broad, black, rounded root, and considerably larger,—large enough, indeed, to fill the hand,—the dracunculus has a reddish root of a serpentine form, to which, in fact, it owes its name. [From “draco,” a “dragon” or “serpent.” Fée says, that it is not to its roots, but to its spotted stem, resembling the skin of an adder, that it owes its name.]

### Chap. 92.—The Aron: Thirteen Remedies.

The Greeks themselves, in fact, have established an immense difference between these two plants, in attributing to the seed of the dracunculus certain hot, pungent properties, and a fetid odour [“Virus.” Fée says that the Arum dracunculus has a strong, fetid odour, and all parts of it are acrid and caustic, while the Arum colocasia has an agreeable flavour when boiled.] so remarkably powerful as to be productive of abortion, [This, Fée says, is fabulous.] while upon the aron, on the other hand, they have bestowed marvellous encomiums. As an article of food, however, they give the preference to the female plant, the male plant being of a harder nature, and more difficult to cook. It carries off, [Though no longer used in medicine, the account here given of the properties of the Arum colocasia is in general correct, a few marvellous details excepted.] they say, all vicious humours from the chest, and powdered and taken in the form either of a potion or of an electuary, it acts as a diuretic and emmenagogue. Powdered and taken in oxymel, it is good for the stomach; and we find it stated that it is administered in ewe’s milk for ulcerations of the intestines, and is sometimes cooked on hot ashes and given in oil for a cough. Some persons, again, are in the habit of boiling it in milk and administering the decoction; and it has been used also in a boiled state as a topical application for defluxions of the eyes, contusions, and affections of the tonsillary glands. \* \* \* \* [Sillig thinks that there is a lacuna here, and that the name “Cleophantus” should be supplied.] prescribes it with oil, as an injection for piles, and recommends it as a liniment, with honey, for freckles.

Cleophantus has greatly extolled this plant as an antidote for poisons, and for the treatment of pleurisy and peripneumony, prepared the same way as for coughs. The seed too, pounded with olive oil or oil of roses, is used as an injection for pains in the ears. Dieuches prescribes it, mixed in bread [Fée thinks that, thus employed, it would be more injurious than beneficial. Though Pliny is treating here of the Arum colocasia or Egyptian Arum, he has mingled some few details with it, relative to the Arum dracunculus, a plant endowed with much more energetic properties. See Note 360 above.] with meal, for the cure of coughs, asthma, hardness of breathing, and purulent expectorations. Diodotus recommends it, in combination with honey, as an electuary for phthisis and diseases of the lungs, and as a topical application even for fractured bones. Applied to the sexual parts, it facilitates delivery in all kinds of animals; and the juice extracted from the root, in combination with Attic honey, disperses films upon the eyes, and diseases of the stomach. A decoction of it with honey is curative of cough; and the juice is a marvellous remedy for ulcers of every description, whether phagedænic, carcinomatous, or serpiginous, and for polypus of the nostrils. The leaves, boiled in wine and oil, are good for burns, and, taken with salt and vinegar, are strongly purgative; boiled with honey, they are useful also for sprains, and used either fresh or dried, with salt, for gout in the joints.

Hippocrates has prescribed the leaves, either fresh or dried, with honey, as a topical application for abscesses. Two drachmæ of the seed or root, in two cyathi of wine, are a sufficient dose to act as an emmenagogue, and a similar quantity will have the effect of bringing away the after-birth, in cases where it is retarded. [See B. viii. c. 54, as to the use alleged to be made by animals of this plant.] Hippocrates used to apply the root also, for the purpose. They say too, that in times of pestilence the employment of aron as an article of food is very beneficial. It dispels the fumes of wine; and the smoke of it burnt drives away serpents, [Fée says that this is very doubtful.] the asp in particular, or else stupefies them to such a degree as to reduce them to a state of torpor. These reptiles also will fly at the approach of persons whose bodies have been rubbed with a preparation of aron with oil of laurel: hence it is generally thought a good plan to administer it in red wine to persons who have been stung by serpents. Cheese, it is said, keeps remarkably well, wrapped in leaves of this plant.

### Chap. 93.—The Dracunculus; Two Remedies.

The plant which I have spoken of [In c. 91 of this Book. This story is owing merely to its appearance, which somewhat resembles the skin of a serpent.] as the dracunculus, is taken out of the ground just when the barley is ripening, and at the moon’s increase. It is quite sufficient to have this plant about one, to be safe from all serpents; and it is said, that an infusion of the larger kind taken in drink, is very useful for persons who have been stung by those reptiles: it is stated also that it arrests the catamenia when in excess, due care being taken not to let iron touch it. The juice of it too is very useful for pains in the ears.

As to the plant known to the Greeks by the name of “dracontion,” I have [“Demonstratum mihi est.”] had it pointed out to me under three different forms; the first [Identified by Fée with the Arum Italicum of Lamarck.] having the leaves of the beet, with a certain proportion of stem, and a purple flower, and bearing a strong resemblance to the aron. Other persons, again, have described it as a plant [Fée queries whether this may not be the Arum maculatum of Linnæus, wake-robin, cuckoo pint, or lords and ladies.] with a long root, embossed to all appearance and full of knots, and consisting of three stems in all; the same parties have recommended a decoction of the leaves in vinegar, as curative of stings inflicted by serpents. The third [Identified by C. Bauhin with the Calla palustris of Linnæus.] plant that has been pointed out to me has a leaf larger than that of the cornel, and a root resembling that of the reed. This root, I have been assured, has as many knots on it as the plant is years old, the leaves, too, being as many in number. The plant is recommended also for the stings of serpents, administered either in wine or in water.

### Chap. 94.—The Arisaros: Three Remedies.

There is a plant also called the “arisaros,” [The Arum arisarum of Linnæus, hooded arum or friar’s cowl, a native of the coasts of Barbary and the South of Europe.] which grows in Egypt, and is similar to the aron in appearance, only that it is more diminutive, and has smaller leaves; the root too is smaller, though fully as large as a good-sized olive. The white arisaros throws out two stems, the other kind only one. They are curative, both of them, of running ulcers and burns, and are used as an injection for fistulas. The leaves, boiled in water, and then beaten up with the addition of oil of roses, arrest the growth of corrosive ulcers. But there is one very marvellous fact connected with this plant—it is quite sufficient to touch the sexual parts of any female animal with it to cause its instantaneous death.

### Chap. 95.—The Millefolium or Myriophyllon; Seven Remedies.

The myriophyllon, [Or “ten thousand leaves.” The Myriophyllum spicatum of Linnæus, according to most authorities, though Fée considers it very doubtful.] by our people known as the “millefolium” has a tender stem, somewhat similar to fennel-giant in appearance, with vast numbers of leaves, to which circumstance it is indebted for its name. It grows in marshy localities, and is remarkably useful for the treatment of wounds. It is taken in vinegar for strangury, affections of the bladder, asthma, and falls with violence; it is extremely efficacious also for tooth-ache.

In Etruria, the same name is given to a small meadow-plant, [Possibly the Achillea millefolium of Linnæus, our milfoil or yarrow. It is still said to have the property of healing wounds made by edge-tools, for which reason it is known in France as the “carpenter’s plant.”] provided with leaves at the sides, like hairs, and particularly useful for wounds. The people of that country say that, applied with axle-grease, it will knit together and unite the tendons of oxen, when they have been accidentally severed by the plough-share. [This assertion, as Fée remarks, is more than doubtful.]

### Chap. 96.—The Pseudobunion: Four Remedies.

The pseudobunion [“Bastard turnip.” Desfontaines identifies it with the Bunium aromaticum; Fée queries whether it may not be the Pimpinella tenuis of Sieber, found in Crete. The Berberis vulgaris has been also suggested.] has the leaves of the turnip, and grows in a shrub-like form, about a palm in height; the most esteemed being that of Crete. For gripings of the bowels, strangury, and pains of the thoracic organs, some five or six sprigs of it are administered in drink.

### Chap. 97.—The Myrrhis, Myriza, or Myrrha: Seven Remedies.

The myrrhis, [Desfontaines identifies it with the Scandix odorata of Linnæus. Hardouin says that it is musk chervil, the Chærophyllum aromaticum of Linnæus, in which he has followed Dodonæus. Fuchsius suggests the Chærophyllum silvestre of Linnæus: Fée expresses himself at a loss to decide.] otherwise known as the myriza or myrrha, bears a strong resemblance to hemlock in the stem, leaves, and blossom, only that it is smaller and more slender: it is by no means unpleasant to the palate. Taken with wine, it acts as an emmenagogue, and facilitates parturition: they say too that in times of pestilence it is very wholesome, taken in drink. It is very useful also for phthisis, administered in broth. It sharpens the appetite, and neutralizes the venom of the phalangium. The juice of this plant, after it has been macerated some three days in water, is curative of ulcers of the face and head.

### Chap. 98.—The Onobrychis: Three Remedies.

The onobrychis [Probably the Hedysarum onobrychis of Linnæus, our sainfoin.] has leaves like those of the lentil, only somewhat [They are very much larger than those of the lentil, in fact. This diversity has caused Fée to express some doubts whether it really is identical with sainfoin. The Polygala officinalis has also been suggested.] longer; the blossom is red, and the root small and slender. It is found growing in the vicinity of springs. Dried and reduced to powder, and sprinkled in white wine, it is curative of strangury, and arrests looseness of the bowels. The juice of it, used as a friction with oil, acts as a sudorific.

### Chap. 99. (17.)—Coracesta and Callicia.

While I am treating of plants of a marvellous nature, I am induced to make some mention of certain magical plants—for what, in fact, can there be more marvellous than they? The first who descanted upon this subject in our part of the world were Pythagoras and Democritus, who have adopted the accounts given by the Magi. Coracesta [Dalechamps considers these appellations to mean the “virgins’ plant,” and the “plant of beauty.”] and callicia, according to Pythagoras, are plants which congeal [The Cissampelos Pareira, as already stated, abounds in mucilage to such a degree, as to impart a consistency to water, without impairing its transparency. See c. 72 of this Book.] water. I find no mention made of them, however, by any other author, and he himself gives no further particulars relative to them.

### Chap. 100.—The Minsas or Corinthia: One Remedy.

Pythagoras gives the name of minsas [The reading of this word is doubtful. Hardouin thinks that it is the same as the Minyanthes mentioned in B. xxi. c. 88.] too, or corinthia, to another plant; a decoction of which, used as a fomentation, will effect an instantaneous cure of stings inflicted by serpents, according to him. He adds too, that if this decoction is poured upon the grass, and a person happens to tread upon it, or if the body should chance to be sprinkled with it, the result is fatal beyond all remedy; so monstrously malignant are the venomous proporties of this plant, except as neutralizing other kinds of poison.
