---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 71-83."
chapter_order: 174
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 71.—The Medicament Called Stomatice, Arteriace, or Panchrestos: Four Remedies.

From the fruit of the mulberry a medicament is prepared, called “panchrestos,” [“All-healing,” “mouth-medicine,” and “medicine for the trachea.”] “stomatice,” or “arteriace:” the following is the method employed. Three sextarii of the juice are reduced, at a slow heat, to the consistency of honey; two denarii of dried omphacium [See B. xii. c. 60. A rob, or sirop of mulberries is prepared for much the same purposes at the present day, but without the omphacium, myrrh, or saffron. An “arteriace” is also mentioned in B. xx. c..] or one of myrrh, with one denarius of saffron, are then added, the whole being beaten up together and mixed with the decoction. There is no medicament known that is more soothing than this, for affections of the mouth, the trachea, the uvula, and the stomach. There is also another mode of preparing it: two sextarii of mulberry juice and one of Attic honey are boiled down in the manner above stated.

There are some other marvellous properties, also, which are mentioned in reference to this tree. When the tree is in bud, and before the appearance of the leaves, the germs of the fruit must be gathered with the left hand—the Greeks give them the name of “ricini.” [Hermolaüs Barbarus is possibly right in suggesting “cytini,” which name has been previously mentioned in connection with the calyx of the pomegranate.] These germs, worn as an amulet before they have touched the ground, have the effect of arresting hæmorrhage, whether proceeding from a wound, from the mouth, from the nostrils, or from piles; for which purposes they are, accordingly, put away and kept. Similar virtues are attributed to a branch just beginning to bear, broken off at full moon, provided also it has not touched the ground: this branch, it is said, attached to the arm, is peculiarly efficacious for the suppression of the catamenia when in excess. The same effect is produced, it is said, when the woman herself pulls it off, whatever time it may happen to be, care being taken not to let it touch the ground, and to wear it attached to the body. The leaves of the mulberry-tree beaten up fresh, or a decoction of them dried, are applied topically for stings inflicted by serpents: an infusion of them, taken in drink, is equally efficacious for that purpose. The juice extracted from the bark of the root, taken in wine or oxycrate, counteracts the venom of the scorpion.

We must also give some account of the method of preparing this medicament employed by the ancients: extracting the juice from the fruit, both ripe and unripe, they mixed it together, and then boiled it down in a copper vessel to the consistency of honey. Some persons were in the habit of adding myrrh and cypress, and then left it to harden in the sun, mixing it with a spatula three times a-day. Such was their receipt for the stomatice, which was also employed by them to promote the cicatrization of wounds. There was another method, also, of dealing with the juice of this fruit: extracting the juice, they used the dried fruit with various articles of food, [From the account given by Dioscorides, B. i. c. 181, this appears to he the meaning of the passage, which is very elliptically expressed, if, indeed, it is not imperfect.] as tending to heighten the flavour; and they were in the habit of employing it medicinally [In a powdered state, probably, as mentioned by Dioscorides.] for corroding ulcers, pituitous expectorations, and all cases in which astringents were required for the viscera. They used it also for the purpose of cleaning [The use of the word “conluebant” would almost make it appear that he is speaking of a liquid.] the teeth. A third mode of employing the juices of this tree is to boil down the leaves and root, the decoction being used, with oil, [The juice (if, indeed, Pliny intends to specify it as an ingredient) will not, as Fée remarks, combine with oil. Dioscorides says, B. i. c. 180, that the leaves are bruised and applied with oil to burns.] as a liniment for the cure of burns. The leaves are also applied by themselves for the same purpose.

An incision made in the root at harvest-time, supplies a juice that is extremely useful for tooth-ache, gatherings, and suppurations; it acts, also, as a purgative upon the bowels. Mulberry-leaves, macerated in urine, remove the hair from hides.

### Chap. 72.—Cherries: Five Observations Upon Them.

Cherries are relaxing to the bowels and unwholesome [Black cherries, Fée says, bigaroons, and others, with a firm flesh, are the most unwholesome. See B. xv. c. 30.] to the stomach; in a dried state, however, they are astringent and diuretic. [This property. Fée says, is attributed by some, in modern times, not to the flesh, or pericarpus of the cherry, but to the stalks of the fruit.] I find it stated by some authors, that if cherries are taken early in the morning covered with dew, the kernels being eaten with them, the bowels will be so strongly acted upon as to effect a cure for gout in the feet.

### Chap. 73.—Medlars: Two Remedies. Sorbs: Two Remedies.

Medlars, the setania [See B. xv. c. 22.] excepted, which has pretty nearly the same properties as the apple, act astringently upon the stomach and arrest looseness of the bowels. The same is the case, too, with dried sorbs; [See B. xv. c. 23.] but when eaten fresh, they are beneficial to the stomach, and are good for fluxes of the bowels.

### Chap. 74. (8.)—Pine-Nuts: Thirteen Remedies.

Pine-nuts, [They are no longer used in medicine, Fée says, but the buds of the pine and fir, the properties of which are analogous, are still used, though not in cases of hæmoptysis.] with the resin in them, are slightly bruised, and then boiled down in water to one-half, the proportion of water being one sextarius to each nut. This decoction, taken in doses of two cyathi, is used for the cure of spitting of blood. The bark of the tree, boiled in wine, is given for griping pains in the bowels. The kernels of the pine-nut allay thirst, and assuage acridities and gnawing pains in the stomach; they tend also to neutralize vicious humours in that region, recruit the strength, and are salutary to the kidneys and the bladder. They would seem, however, to exercise an irritating effect [In a rancid state particularly, they would have this effect.] upon the fauces, and to increase cough. Taken in water, wine, raisin wine, or a decoction of dates, they carry off bile. For gnawing pains in the stomach of extreme violence, they are mixed with cucumber-seed and juice of purslain; they are employed, too, in a similar manner for ulcerations of the bladder and kidneys, [Fée thinks that the mixture might be useful in these cases.] having a diuretic effect.

### Chap. 75.—Almonds: Twenty-nine Remedies.

A decoction of the root of the bitter almond [See B. xv. c. 24.] clears the complexion, and gives the face a brighter colour. [“Hilariorem.” At the present day it is not a decoction of the root, but the fixed oil of the kernels, that is used as a cosmetic; for which purpose it is used with oil of sweet almonds and wax.] Bitter almonds are provocative of sleep, [Their narcotic effect is owing to the prussic, or hydro-cyanic, acid which they contain.] and sharpen the appetite; they act, also, as a diuretic and as an emmenagogue. They are used topically for head-ache, when there is fever more particularly. Should the head-ache proceed from inebriation, [Almonds were a favourite food with the monks in the middle ages; not improbably because they tended to dispel the fumes of wine. Almond milk, similar to our custard, was a standing dish at their “charities” and anniversaries.] they are applied with vinegar, rose-oil, and one sextarius of water. Used in combination with amylum [See B. xviii. c..] and mint, they arrest hæmorrhage. They are useful, also, for lethargy and epilepsy, and the head is anointed with them for the cure of epinyctis. In combination with wine, they heal putrid ulcers of an inveterate nature, and, with honey, bites inflicted by dogs. [They would he of no use whatever in these cases.] They are employed, also, for the cure of scaly eruptions of the face, the parts affected being fomented first.

Taken in water, or, as is often done, in an electuary, with resin of terebinth, [Otherwise turpentine.] they remove pains in the liver and kidneys; used with raisin wine, they are good for calculus and strangury. Bruised in hydromel, they are useful for cleansing the skin; and taken in an electuary with the addition of a small proportion of elelisphacus, [See B. xxii. c..] they are good for diseases of the liver, cough, and colic, a piece about the size of a hazel-nut being taken in honey. It is said that if five bitter almonds are taken by a person before sitting down to drink, he will be proof against inebriation; [See Note above. Plutarch tells us that Drusus, the brother of Tiberius, one of the greatest drinkers of his time, used almonds for this purpose. Fée will not believe that they have any such preventive effect.] and that foxes, if they eat bitter almonds, [Almonds will kill small animals, birds, for instance.] will be sure to die immediately, if they cannot find water to lap.

As to sweet almonds, their remedial properties are not [They are much more used in modern medicine than bitter almonds.] so extensive; still, however, they are of a purgative nature, and are diuretic. Eaten fresh, they are difficult [There is some ground, Fée says, for this assertion.] of digestion.

### Chap. 76.—Greek Nuts: One Remedy.

Greek nuts, [See B. xv. c. 24, where Pliny expresses himself at a loss as to their identification.] taken in vinegar with wormwood seed, are said to be a cure for jaundice. Used alone, they are employed topically for the treatment of diseases of the fundament, and condylomata in particular, as also cough and spitting of blood.

### Chap. 77.—Walnuts: Twenty-four Remedies. The Mithridatic Antidote.

Walnuts [See B. xv. c. 24.] have received their name in Greek from being oppressive [Κάρυα, from κάρος, “heaviness,” or κάρη, the “head.” See Vol. III. p. 316.] to the head; for, in fact, the emanations [A mere prejudice, no doubt.] from the tree itself and the leaves penetrate to the brain. The kernels, also, have a similar effect when eaten, though not in so marked a degree. When fresh gathered, they are most agreeable eating; for when dry, they are more oleaginous, unwholesome to the stomach, difficult of digestion, productive of head-ache, and bad for cough, [The rancidity of the oil which they contain, renders them irritating to the throat and stomach.] or for a person when about to take an emetic fasting: they are good in cases of tenesmus only, as they carry off the pituitous humours of the body. Eaten beforehand, they deaden the effects of poison, and, employed with rue and oil, they are a cure for quinsy. They act as a corrective, also, to onions, and modify their flavour. They are applied to inflammations of the ears, with a little honey, and with rue they are used for affections of the mamillæ, and for sprains. With onions, salt, and honey, they are applied to bites inflicted by dogs or human beings. Walnut-shells are used for cauterizing [Fée remarks, that it is difficult to see how this could be done.] carious teeth; and with these shells, burnt and then beaten up in oil or wine, the heads of infants are anointed, they having a tendency to make the hair grow; hence they are used in a similar manner for alopecy also. These nuts, eaten in considerable numbers, act as an expellent upon tapeworm. [This statement, as Fée remarks, is quite unfounded.] Walnuts, when very old, are [This assertion is also entirely imaginary.] curative of gangrenous sores and carbuncles, of bruises also. Green walnut-shells [“Cortex juglandium.” Fée says that by this term is meant, not the green outer shell, husk, or pericarpus of the walnut, but the bark of the tree.] are employed for the cure of lichens and dysentery, and the leaves are beaten up with vinegar as an application for ear-ache. [This asserted use of them has not been verified by modern experience.]

After the defeat of that mighty monarch, Mithridates, Cneius Pompeius found in his private cabinet a recipe for an antidote in his own hand-writing; it was to the following effect: [The various receipts for the preparation of this Mithridate or antidote differ very widely; and, indeed, the probability is, as Dr. Heberden says, that Mithridates was as much a stranger to his own antidote, as modern physicians have since been to the medicines daily advertised under their names. Mithridates is said to have so fortified himself against all noxious drugs and poisons, that none would produce any effect when he attempted to destroy himself—a mere fable, no doubt.] —Take two dried walnuts, two figs, and twenty leaves of rue; pound them all together, with the addition of a grain of salt; if a person takes this mixture fasting, he will be proof against all poisons for that day. [This, we are told by Galen, was regularly done by the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, De Antid. B. i. c. i.] Walnut kernels, chewed by a man fasting, and applied to the wound, effect an instantaneous cure, it is said, of bites inflicted by a mad dog.

### Chap. 78.—Hazel-Nuts: Three Observations Upon Them. Pistachio-nuts: Eight Observations Upon Them. Chesnuts: Five Observations Upon Them.

Hazel-nuts [See B. xv. c. 24.] are productive of head-ache, and flatulency of the stomach; they contribute, however, to the increase of flesh more than would be imagined. Parched, they are remedial for catarrhs, and beaten up and taken with hydromel, [An emulsion of them fresh, with honey, might be useful, Fée thinks, in such a case.] they are good for an inveterate cough. Some persons add grains of pepper, [Either of these additions would certainly neutralize the good effects of the emulsion. The addition of raisin wine, however, is recommended by Dioscorides.] and others take them in raisin wine.

Pistachio-nuts [See B. xiii. c. 10.] have the same properties, and are productive of the same effects, as pine-nuts; in addition to which, they are used as an antidote to the venom [They are of no efficacy whatever for such a purpose.] of serpents, eaten or taken in drink.

Chesnuts [See B. xv. c. 25. They are no longer used in medicine, and, as Fée says, it is extremely doubtful if they possess any of the properties here attributed to them.] have a powerful effect in arresting fluxes of the stomach and intestines, are relaxing to the bowels, are beneficial in cases of spitting of blood, and have a tendency to make flesh. [They are still looked upon as very nourishing, as, indeed, is the case with all the feculent fruits.]

### Chap. 79.—Carobs: Five Observations Upon Them. The Cornel; One Remedy. The Fruit of the Arbutus.

Fresh carobs [See B. xv. c. 26.] are unwholesome to the stomach, and relaxing to the bowels; [They are productive of colic and diarrhœa.] in a dried state, however, they are astringent, and are much more beneficial to the stomach; they are diuretic also. For pains in the stomach, persons boil three Syrian carobs [See B. xiii. c. 16.] with one sextarius of water, down to one-half, and drink the decoction.

The juices which exude from the branches of the cornel [See B. xv. c. 31.] are received on a plate of red-hot iron [The juice of the sap would, to all appearance, produce an acetate or oxide of iron.] without it touching the wood; the rust of which is applied for the cure of incipient lichens. The arbutus or unedo [See B. xv. c. 28.] bears a fruit that is difficult of digestion, and injurious to the stomach.

### Chap. 80.—The Laurel; Sixty-nine Observations Upon It.

All parts of the laurel, both the leaves, bark, and berries, are of a warming [All parts of the laurel, the berries in particular, are impregnated with an essential oil with a powerful odour and of an exciting nature. Upon this volatile principle, and nothing else, the whole of its medicinal properties are based.] nature; and a decoction of them, the leaves in particular, is very useful for affections of the bladder and uterus. [This assertion, Fée says, is no better than fabulous.] The leaves, applied topically, neutralize the poison of wasps, bees, and hornets, as also that of serpents, the seps, [See Lucan’s Pharsalia, B. ix. ll. 723, 776.] dipsas, [See the Pharsalia, B. ix. l. 719.] and viper, in particular. Boiled in oil, they promote the catamenia; and the more tender of the leaves beaten up with polenta, are used for inflammations of the eyes, with rue for inflammations of the testes, and with rose-oil, or oil of iris, [“Irino.” See B. xiii. c. 2.] for head-ache. Three leaves, chewed and swallowed for three days in succession, are a cure for cough, and beaten up with honey, for asthma. The bark of the root is dangerous to pregnant women; the root itself disperses calculi, and taken in doses of three oboli in aromatic wine, it acts beneficially on the liver. The leaves, taken in drink, act as an emetic; [This assertion, Fée says, is untrue.] and the berries, pounded and applied as a pessary, or else taken in drink, promote menstruation. Two of the berries with the skin removed, taken in wine, are a cure for inveterate cough and hardness of breathing; if, however, this is accompanied with fever, they are given in water, or else in an electuary with raisin wine, or boiled in hydromel. Employed in a similar manner, they are good for phthisis, and for all defluxions of the chest, as they have the effect of detaching the phlegm and bringing it off.

For stings inflicted by scorpions, four laurel-berries are taken in wine. Applied with oil, they are a cure for epinyctis, freckles, running sores, ulcers of the mouth, and scaly eruptions. The juice of the berries is curative of porrigo and phthiriasis; and for pains in the ears, or hardness of hearing, it is injected into those organs with old wine and oil of roses. All venomous creatures fly at the approach of persons who have been anointed with this juice: taken in drink, the juice of the small-leaved [See B. xv. c. 39.] laurel in particular, it is good for stings inflicted by them. The berries, [All these statements as to the properties of the berries, Fée says, are hypothetical and more than doubtful.] used with wine, neutralize the venom of serpents, scorpions, and spiders; they are applied also, topically, with oil and vinegar, in diseases of the spleen and liver, and with honey to gangrenous sores. In cases of lassitude and shivering fits, it is a very good plan to rub the body with juice of laurel-berries mixed with nitre. Some persons are of opinion that delivery is accelerated by taking laurel-root to the amount of one acetabulum, in water, and that, used fresh, it is better than dried. It is recommended by some authorities, to take ten of the berries in drink, for the sting of the scorpion; and in cases of relaxation of the uvula, to boil a quarter of a pound of the berries, or leaves, in three sextarii of water, down to one third, the decoction being used warm, as a gargle. For head-ache, also, it is recommended to bruise an uneven number of the berries in oil, the mixture being warmed for use.

The leaves of the Delphic laurel [The Laurus nobilis of modern botany.] bruised and applied to the nostrils from time to time, are a preservative [A statement, Fée says, that is altogether illusory.] against contagion in pestilence, and more particularly if they are burnt. The oil of the [Of the berries, Fée thinks.] Delphic laurel is employed in the preparation of cerates and the medicinal composition known as “acopum,” [See c. of this Book; also B. xxvii. c. 13.] and is used for fits of shivering occasioned by cold, for the relaxation of the sinews, and for the cure of pains in the side and the cold attacks in fevers. [Fée thinks that this oil, in conjunction with adipose substances, might be useful for the treatment of rheumatic affections.] Warmed in the rind of a pomegranate, it is applied topically for the cure of ear-ache. A decoction of the leaves boiled down in water to one third, used as a gargle, braces the uvula, and taken in drink allays pains in the bowels and intestines. The more tender leaves, bruised in wine and applied at night, are a cure for pimples and prurigo.

The other varieties of the laurel possess properties which are nearly analogous. The root of the laurel of Alexandria, [The Ruscus hypophyllum of Linnæus. It is quite inodorous, Fée says, and has no analogous properties whatever with the next-mentioned plant.] or of Mount Ida, [See B. xv. c. 39.] accelerates delivery, being administered in doses of three denarii to three cyathi of sweet wine; it acts also as an emmenagogue, and brings away the after-birth. Taken in drink in a similar manner, the wild laurel, known as “daphnoides” and by the other names which we have mentioned, [In B. xv. c. 39.] is productive of beneficial effects. The leaves of it, either fresh or dried, taken in doses of three drachmæ, in hydromel with salt, act as a purgative [The peasantry of France, Fée says, still use as a purgative the berries of the Daphne mezereum, and of the Daphne laureola; and in Aragon and Catalonia, the leaves of the Thymelea are used for a similar purpose. The employment of them, however, is not unattended with danger.] upon the bowels. The wood, chewed, brings off phlegm, and the leaves act as an “emetic;” they are unwholesome, however, to the stomach. The berries, too, are sometimes taken, fifteen in number, as a purgative.

### Chap. 81.—Myrtle; Sixty Observations Upon It.

The white [A variety with white berries, but which variety it appears impossible to say.] cultivated myrtle is employed for fewer medicinal purposes than the black one. [See B. xv. c. 37.] The berries [The leaves and berries are bitter, and rich in volatile oil.] of it are good for spitting of blood, and taken in wine, they neutralize the poison of fungi. They impart an agreeable smell [This is consistent with fact.] to the breath, even when eaten the day before; thus, for instance, in Menander we find the Synaristosæ [A work of some kind, (perhaps a play, if the comic writer, Menander, is the person alluded to) the title of which means “the Women Dining together.” Hardouin, with justice, ridicules the notion of Ortelius that this is the name of some place or town.] eating them. They are taken also for dysentery, [The astringency communicated by the tannin which they contain would probably make them useful for dysentery; if at the same time, as Fée says, they are not too exciting, by reason of their essential oil.] in doses of one denarius, in wine: and they are employed lukewarm, in wine, for the cure of obstinate ulcers on the extremities. Mixed with polenta, they are employed topically in ophthalmia, and for the cardiac disease [See B. xi. c. 71.] they are applied to the left breast. For stings inflicted by scorpions, diseases of the bladder, head-ache, and fistulas of the eye before suppuration, they are similarly employed; and for tumours and pituitous eruptions, the kernels are first removed and the berries are then pounded in old wine. The juice of the berries [“Succus seminis.” Sillig has “succus feminis,” apparently a misprint—the only one that has been met with thus far in his elaborate edition.] acts astringently upon the bowels, and is diuretic: mixed with cerate it is applied topically to blisters, pituitous eruptions, and wounds inflicted by the phalangium; it imparts a black tint, [It might change the colour of the hair, but for a short time only.] also, to the hair.

The oil of this myrtle is of a more soothing nature than the juice, and the wine [See B. xv. c. 37.] which is extracted from it, and which possesses the property of never inebriating, is even more so. This wine, used when old, acts astringently upon the stomach and bowels, cures griping pains in those regions, and dispels nausea.

The dried leaves, powdered and sprinkled upon the body, check profuse perspirations, in fever even; they are good, too, used as a fomentation, for cœliac affections, procidence of the uterus, diseases of the fundament, running ulcers, erysipelas, loss of the hair, scaly and other eruptions, and burns. This powder is used as an ingredient, also, in the plasters known as “liparæ;” [Cerates, or adipose or oleaginous plasters.] and for the same reason the oil of the leaves is used for a similar purpose, being extremely efficacious as an application to the humid parts of the body, the mouth and the uterus, for example.

The leaves themselves, beaten up with wine, neutralize [In reality they have no such effect.] the bad effects of fungi; and they are employed, in combination with wax, for diseases of the joints, and gatherings. A decoction of them, in wine, is taken for dysentery and dropsy. Dried and reduced to powder, they are sprinkled upon ulcers and hæmorrhages. They are useful, also, for the removal of freckles, and for the cure of hang-nails, [“Pterygia.”] whitlows, condylomata, affections of the testes, and sordid ulcers. In combination with cerate, they are used for burns.

For purulent discharges from the ears, the ashes of the leaves are employed, as well as the juice and the decoction: the ashes are also used in the composition of antidotes. For a similar purpose the blossoms are stripped from off the young branches, which are burnt in a furnace, and then pounded in wine. The ashes of the leaves, too, are used for the cure of burns. To prevent ulcerations from causing swellings in the inguinal glands, it will suffice for the patient to carry [Fée says here—“Pliny terminates, by a credulity quite unworthy of him, a Chapter, full of false or exaggerated assertions, relative to the properties of the myrtle.”] a sprig of myrtle about him which has never touched the ground or any implement of iron.

### Chap. 82.—Myrtidanum: Thirteen Remedies.

We have already described the manner in which myrtidanum [Or “myrtle-wine.” See B. xiv. c. 19; also B. xv. c. 35.] is made. Applied in a pessary, or as a fomentation or liniment, it is good for affections of the uterus, being much more efficacious than the bark of the tree, or the leaves and seed. There is a juice also extracted from the more tender leaves, which are pounded in a mortar for the purpose, astringent wine, or, according to one method, rain-water, being poured upon them a little at a time. This extract is used for the cure of ulcers of the mouth, the fundament, the uterus, and the abdomen. It is employed, also, for dyeing the hair black, the suppression of exudations at the arm-pits, [“Alarum perfusiones.”] the removal of freckles, and other purposes in which astringents are required.

### Chap. 83.—The Wild Myrtle, Otherwise Called Oxymyrsine, or Chamæmyrsine, and the Ruscus: Six Remedies.

The wild myrtle, oxymyrsine, [See B. xv. cc. 7, 37: the Ruscus aculeatus of Linnæus, or little holly of the French, belonging to the Asparagea, and not the myrtles.] or chamæmyrsine, differs from the cultivated myrtle in the redness of its berries and its diminutive height. The root of it is held in high esteem; a decoction of it, in wine, is taken for pains in the kidneys and strangury, more particularly when the urine is thick and fetid. Pounded in wine, it is employed for the cure of jaundice, and as a purgative for the uterus. The same method is adopted, also, with the young shoots, which are sometimes roasted in hot ashes and eaten as a substitute for asparagus. [Being of the same family, of course there is a great resemblance.]

The berries, taken with wine, or oil and vinegar, break calculi [In reality they have no such lithotriptic nature, Fée says.] of the bladder: beaten up with rose-oil and vinegar, they allay head-ache. Taken in drink, they are curative of jaundice. Castor calls the wild myrtle with prickly leaves, or oxymyrsine, from which brooms are made, by the name of “ruscus” [A kindred plant with the one already mentioned by our author: it is still used for making brooms in some parts of Europe.] —the medicinal properties of it are just the same.

Thus much, then, with reference to the medicinal properties of the cultivated trees; let us now pass on to the wild ones.

Summary. —Remedies, narratives, and observations, nine hundred and eighteen.

Roman authors quoted. —C. Valgius, [See end of B..] Pompeius Lenæus, [See end of B. xiv.] Sextius Niger [See end of B. xii.] who wrote in Greek, Julius Bassus [See end of B..] who wrote in Greek, Antonius Castor, [See end of B..] M. Varro, [See end of B. ii.] Cornelius Celsus, [See end of B. vii.] Fabianus. [For Fabianus Papirius, see end of B. ii; for Fabianus Sabinus, see end of B. xviii.]

Foreign authors quoted. —Theophrastus, [See end of B. iii.] Democritus, [See end of B. ii.] Orpheus, [See end of B..] Pythagoras, [See end of B. ii.] Mago, [See end of B. viii.] Menander [See end of B..] who wrote the “Biochresta,” Nicander, [See end of B. viii.] Homer, Hesiod, [See end of B. vii.] Musæus, [See end of B..] Sophocles, [See end of B..] Anaxilaüs. [See end of B..]

Medical authors quoted. —Mnesitheus, [See end of B..] Callimachus, [See end of B. iv.] Phanias [See end of B..] the physician, Timaristus, [See end of B..] Simus, [See end of B..] Hippocrates, [See end of B. vii.] Chrysippus, [See end of B..] Diocles, [See end of B..] Ophelion, [See end of B..] Heraclides, [See end of B. xii.] Hicesius, [See end of B. xv.] Dionysius, [See end of B. xii.] Apollodorus [See end of B..] of Citium, Apollodorus [See end of B..] of Tarentum, Plistonicus, [See end of B..] Medius, [See end of B..] Dieuches, [See end of B..] Cleophantus, [See end of B..] Philistion, [See end of B..] Asclepiades, [See end of B. vii.] Crateuas, [See end of B..] Petronius Diodotus, [See end of B..] Iollas, [See end of B. xii.] Erasistratus, [See end of B. xi.] Diagoras, [See end of B. xii.] Andreas, [See end of B..] Mnesides, [See end of B. xii.] Epicharmus, [See end of B..] Damion, [See end of B..] Dalion, [See end of B. vi.] Sosimenes, [See end of B..] Tlepolemus, [See end of B..] Metrodorus, [See end of B..] Solo, [See end of B..] Lycus, [See end of B. xii.] Olympias [See end of B..] of Thebes, Philinus, [See end of B..] Petrichus, [See end of B..] Micton, [See end of B..] Glaucias, [See end of B..] Xenocrates. [See end of B..]
