---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 30-52."
chapter_order: 246
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 30.—Carchedonia.

Carchedonia, [Not identical, most probably, with the Carchedonian or Carthaginian stone mentioned in Chapter, which was probably a garnet or a ruby. Ajasson has no doubt that it is identical with jasper quartz, including the varieties called Striped or Riband jasper, and Egyptian jasper.] too, is said to have the same property, though far inferior in value to the stones already mentioned. It is found in the mountains among the Nasamones, [See B. v. c. 5, and B. vii. c. 2.] being produced, the natives think, by showers sent for the purpose from heaven. These stones are found by the light of the moon, more particularly when at full: in former days, Carthage was the entrepôt for them. Archelaüs speaks of a brittle variety being found in the vicinity of Thebes also, in Egypt, full of veins, and similar to dying embers in appearance. I find it stated, too, that in former times, drinking-vessels used to be made of this stone and of lychnis: [Tourmaline, probably, in combination with other mineral substances.] all these kinds of stone, however, offer the most obstinate resistance to the graver, and, if used for seals, are apt to bring away a part of the wax.

### Chap. 31.—Sarda: Five Varieties of It.

Sarda, [Carnelian, a variety of Chalcedony. It is originally grey, or greyish red, which afterwards turns to a rich, deep, red, on exposure to the sun’s rays, and subsequently to artificial heat.] on the other hand, is remarkably useful for this purpose; a stone which shares its name, in part, with sardonyx. It is a common stone, and was first found at Sardes, but the most esteemed kind is that of the vicinity of Babylon. When certain quarries are being worked, these stones are found, adhering, like a kind of heart, to the interior of the rock. This mineral, however, is said to be now extinct in Persia; though it is to be found in numerous other localities, Paros and Assos, for example.

In India [Which supplies the best carnelians at the present day.] there are three varieties of this stone; the red sarda, the one known as “pionia,” from its thickness, and a third kind, beneath which they place a ground of silver tinsel. The Indian stones are transparent, those of Arabia being more opaque. There are some found also in the vicinity of Leucas in Epirus, and in Egypt, which have a ground placed beneath them of leaf gold. In the case of this stone, too, the male stone shines with a more attractive brilliancy than the female, which is of a thicker substance, and more opaque. Among the ancients there was no precious stone in more common use than this; at all events, it is this stone that is made so much parade of in the comedies of Menander and Philemon. No one, too, among the transparent stones is tarnished more speedily by exposure to moisture than this; though of all liquids, it is oil that acts the most readily upon it. Those stones which are like honey in colour, are generally disapproved of, and still more so, when they have the complexion of earthenware. [From their mixture, Ajasson says, with argillaceous earth.]

### Chap. 32. (8.)—Topazos: Two Varieties of It.

Topazos [Under this name Pliny evidently speaks of the stone known to us as Chrysolite, and possibly of green agate as well. Our Topaz cannot be easily recognized in this Chapter, at all events.] is a stone that is still held in very high estimation for its green tints: indeed, when it was first discovered, it was preferred to every other kind of precious stone. It so happened that some Troglodytic pirates, suffering from tempest and hunger, having landed upon an island off the coast of Arabia known as Cytis, [See B. vi. c. 34.] when digging there for roots and grass, discovered this precious stone: such, at least, is the opinion expressed by Archelaüs. Juba says that there is an island in the Red Sea called “Topazos,” [See B. vi. c. 34.] at a distance of three hundred stadia from the main land; that it is surrounded by fogs, and is often sought by navigators in consequence; and that, owing to this, it received its present name, [Τοπάζω in Greek, signifies “to conjecture.”] the word “topazin” meaning “to seek,” in the language of the Troglodytæ. He states also, that Philon, the king’s præfect, was the first to bring these stones from this island; that, on his presenting them to Queen Berenice, the mother of the second Ptolemæus, she was wonderfully pleased with them; and that, at a later period, a statue, four cubits in height, was made of this stone, [It was agate, most probably.] in honour of Arsinoë, the wife of Ptolemæus Philadelphus, it being consecrated in the temple known as the “Golden Temple.”

The most recent writers say that this stone is found also in the vicinity of Alabastrum, a city of Thebais, and they distinguish two varieties of it, the prasoïdes [“Leek-green.” Ajasson and Desfontaines think that this must have been either Oriental Chrysolite or Oriental Peridote.] and the chrysopteron; [Some would identify this with Oriental topaz or yellow corundum, a variety of the Sapphire; while others would see in it the genuine Topaz; and others, again, think it synonymous with the Chrysoprase. The name “chrysopteron” means “golden-wing.”] which last is similar to chrysoprasus, [“Leek-green and gold.” An apple or leek-green Chalcedony, coloured by nickel. See Chapters,, and, of this Book.] all the shades of it tending, more or less, to resemble the colouring principle of the leek. Topazos is the largest of all the precious stones, and is the only one among those of high value that yields to the action of the file, the rest being polished by the aid of stone of Naxos. [See B. xxxvi. c..] It admits, too, of being worn by use.

### Chap. 33.—Callaina.

With this stone we must also couple another, which resembles it more closely in appearance than in value, the stone known as “callaina,” [Dana thinks this identical with the Turquois. Ajasson and Desfontaines identify it with Oriental Peridote.] and of a pale green colour. It is found in the countries [Turquois is found in large quantities in a mountainous district of Persia, not far from Nichabour; where it occurs in veins which traverse the mountains in all directions.] that lie at the back of India, among the Phycari, namely, who inhabit Mount Caucasus, the Sacæ, and the Dahæ. It is remarkable for its size, but is covered with holes and full of extraneous matter; that, however, which is found in Carmania is of a finer quality, and far superior. In both cases, however, it is only amid frozen and inaccessible rocks that it is found, protruding from the surface, like an eye in appearance, and slightly adhering to the rock; not as though it formed an integral part of it, but with all the appearance of having been attached to it. People so habituated as they are to riding on horseback, cannot find the energy and dexterity requisite for climbing the rocks to obtain the stones, while, at the same time, they are quite terrified at the danger of doing so. Hence it is, that they attack the stones with slings from a distance, and so bring them down, moss and all. It is with this stone that the people pay their tribute, and this the rich look upon as their most graceful ornament for the neck. [Isidorus says, B. xvi. c. 17, that they wore it in the ears. The Shah of Persia, it is said, retains for his own use all the larger and more finely tinted specimens of turquois that are found in his dominions.] This constitutes the whole of their wealth, with some, and it is their chief glory to recount how many of these stones they have brought down from the mountain heights since the days of their childhood. Their success, however, is extremely variable; [This story is now regarded as fabulous.] for while some, at the very first throw, have brought down remarkably fine specimens, many have arrived at old age without obtaining any.

Such is the method of procuring these stones; their form being given them by cutting, a thing that is easily effected. The best of them have just the colour of smaragdus, a thing that proves that the most pleasing property in them is one that belongs of right to another stone. Their beauty is heightened by setting them in gold, and there is no stone to which the contrast of the gold is more becoming. The finest of them lose their colour by coming in contact with oil, unguents, or undiluted wine even; whereas those of a poorer quality preserve their colour better. There is no stone, too, that is more easily counterfeited in glass. Some writers say, that this stone is to be found in Arabia also, in the nest of the bird known as the “melancoryphus.” [See B. x. cc. 44, 79.]

### Chap. 34.—Prasius; Three Varieties of It.

There are numerous other kinds also of green stones. To the more common class belongs prasius; [The stone now known as “Prase” is a vitreous, leek-green, variety of massive quartz.] one variety of which is disfigured with spots [This may possibly have been Plasma, a faintly translucent Chalcedony, approaching jasper, having a greenish colour, sprinkled with yellow and whitish dots, and a glistening lustre. Or, perhaps, Bloodstone or Heliotrope, a kind of jasper.] like blood, while another kind is marked with three streaks of white. To all these stones chrysoprasus [See the preceding Chapter, and Note.] is preferred, which is also similar to the colouring matter of the leek, but varies in tint between topazos and gold. This stone is found of so large a size as to admit of drinking-boats [“Cymbia.” Drinking vessels shaped like a boat.] even being made of it, and is cut into cylinders very frequently.

### Chap. 35.—Nilion.

India, which produces these stones, produces nilion [Or “Nile-stone.” Egyptian jasper, or Egyptian pebble, a kind of quartz.] also, a stone that differs from the last in its dull, diminished lustre, which, when steadily looked upon, soon fades from the sight. Sudines says that it is to be found also in the Siberus, a river of Attica. In appearance it resembles a smoke-coloured topazos, or, in some cases, a topazos with a tint like honey. According to Juba, Æthiopia produces it, upon the shores of the river known to us as the Nilus; to which circumstance, he says, it owes its name.

### Chap. 36.—Molochitis.

Molochitis [Our Malachite, a green carbonate of copper. See B. xxxiii. c..] is not transparent, being of a deeper green, and more opaque than smaragdus; its name is derived from the mallow, [Called μολόχη or μαλάχη in Greek.] which it resembles in colour. It is highly esteemed for making seals, and it is endowed by Nature with medicinal properties which render it a preservative for infants against certain dangers which menace them. This stone is a native of Arabia. [Also of Siberia, Shetland, the United States, and numerous other localities.]

### Chap. 37.—Iaspis; Fourteen Varieties of It. Defects Found in Iaspis.

Iaspis, [Meadow-green jasper.] too, is green, and often transparent; a stone which, if surpassed by many others, still retains the renown which it acquired in former times. Many countries produce this stone: that of India is like smaragdus in colour; that of Cyprus is hard, and of a full sea-green; and that of Persia is sky-blue, whence its name, “aërizusa.” [Salmasius erroneously takes this to be the Turquoise. It is our sky-blue jasper, no doubt. See Beckmann, Hist. Inv. Vol. I. p. 471, Bohn’s Edition.] Similar to this last is the Caspian iaspis. On the banks of the river Thermodon the iaspis is of an azure colour; in Phrygia, it is purple; and in Cappadocia of an azure purple, sombre, and not refulgent. Amisos [See B. vi. c. 2.] sends us an iaspis like that of India in colour, and Chalcedon, [The Bamberg MS. gives “Calchedon” here.] a stone of a turbid hue.

But it is of less consequence to distinguish the several localities that furnish it, than it is to remark upon the degrees of excellence which they present. The best kind is that which has a shade of purple, the next best being the rose-coloured, and the next the stone with the green colour of the smaragdus; to each of which the Greeks have given names [Namely, πορφυρίζουσα, ῥοδίζουσα, and σμαραγδίζουσα.] according to their respective tints. A fourth kind, which is called by them “boria,” [“Northern,” apparently.] resembles in colour the sky of a morning in autumn; this, too, will be the same that is known as “aërizusa.” [“Sky-blue,” mentioned above.] There is an iaspis also which resembles sarda [See Chapter 31. Red jasper, or perhaps Red porphyry.] in appearance, and another with a violet tint. Not less numerous, too, are the other kinds that are left undescribed; but they are all blue to a fault, [“Aut” appeals to be a preferable reading to the “ut” of the Bamberg MS.] or else resemble crystal in appearance, or the tints of the myxa [See B. xv. cc. 12, 13.] plum. There is the terebenthine [“Terebinthizusa.” Yellow jasper, Ajasson says.] -coloured iaspis also; improperly so called, in my opinion, as it has all the appearance of being a composition of numerous gems of this description.

The best of these stones are set in an open bezel, the gold of which only embraces the margins of the stone, leaving the upper and lower surfaces uncovered. One great defect in them is a subdued lustre, and a want of refulgence when viewed from a distance. Grains also like salt appear within the stone, and all the other defects which are common [See Chapter of this Book.] to precious stones in general. Sometimes they are imitated in glass; a fraud, however, which may be easily detected, from the material throwing out its refulgence, instead of concentrating it within itself. To this class also belongs the stone called “sphragis,” [“Seal-stone.” A kind of carnelian, probably.] which is only reckoned as belonging to the domain of precious stones, from the circumstance that it is the best of all for making signets. [“Publico gemmarum dominio iis tantum dato, quoniam optime signent.” The above is the sense given to the passage by Holland, Ajasson, and Littré; but another translation may also be suggested—“A stone to which alone, by general consent, is awarded the custody of precious stones, from the fact that it makes the best impression as a seal.” In reference to the custom of putting a seal on the dactyliothecæ, or jewel-caskets. See page 80 of this Book.]

(9.) Throughout all the East, it is the custom, it is said, to wear iaspis by way of amulet. The variety of this stone which resembles smaragdus in colour is often found with a white line running transversely through the middle; in which case it is known as “monogrammos:” [“Single-lined.”] when it is streaked with several lines, it is called “polygrammos.” [“Many-lined.”] Here, too, I may take the opportunity of exposing the falsehoods [Albertus Magnus, De Mineral. B. ii., has several other stories respecting it of a similar nature.] of the magicians, who pretend that this stone is beneficial for persons when speaking in public. There is a stone also that is formed of iaspis and onyx combined, and is known as “iasponyx.” [Jasper onyx.] Sometimes this stone has a clouded appearance; sometimes it has spots upon the surface like snow; [Identified by Ajasson with snow-flake chalcedony.] and sometimes it is stellated with red spots. [Spotted jasper onyx.] One kind resembles salt of Megara [See B. xxxi. c. 41.] in appearance, and another is known as capnias, [Smoked jasper onyx.] and looks as if it had been smoked. We have seen in our day an iaspis [It is still used for making vases, boxes, knife-handles, and other articles, and is much used in the manufacture of Florentine mosaics. We may also remark, that the “iaspis” of Pliny probably included some stones not of the jasper kind.] fifteen inches in length, of which a figure of Nero was made, armed with a cuirass.

### Chap. 38.—Cyanos; the Several Varieties of It.

We must also give a separate account of cyanos, [“Azure stone;” generally supposed to have been a species of Lapis lazuli or azure. Beckmann is of opinion that it was a mineral or mountain blue, tinged with copper.] a name which, until very recently, was given to a species of iaspis, on account of its cærulean colour. The best kind is that of Scythia, [It is found in China, Persia, Siberia, and Bucharia.] the next best being the produce of Cyprus, and, last of all, that of Egypt. An artificial [Ultramarine is prepared from Lapis lazuli, and an artificial kind is extensively in use, which equals the native in permanency and brilliancy of colour, and is very extensively employed in the arts. Theophrastus, De Lapid. sec. 55, speaks of this artificial ultramarine.] kind is much in use, that is prepared by dyeing other substances; and this invention is looked upon as one of the great glories of the kings of Egypt, the name of the king who first discovered it being still preserved in their annals. This stone, too, is divided into male and female, and sometimes it has the appearance of being powdered with a golden dust, in much the same way as sapphiros.

### Chap. 39.—Sapphiros.

For sapphiros, [This must not be taken for the Sapphire of the present day, but was most probably Lapis lazuli, and identical, perhaps, with Cyanos. Beckmann has devoted considerable attention to this subject; Hist. Inv. Vol. I. pp. 468-473. Bohn’s Edition.] too, is refulgent with spots [Particles of iron pyrites, probably, which are frequently to be seen in Lapis lazuli.] like gold. It is also of an azure colour, though sometimes, but rarely, it is purple; the best kind being that which comes from Media. In no case, however, is this stone diaphanous; in addition to which, it is not suited for engraving when intersected with hard particles of a crystalline [Quartz, probably, according to some authorities.] nature. Those among them that have the colour of cyanos are generally thought to be the male stones.

### Chap. 40.—Amethystos; Four Varieties of It. Socondion. Sapenos. Pharanitis. Aphrodites Blepharon, Anteros, or Pæderos.

We will now commence with another class of precious stones, those of a purple colour, or whose tints are derived from purple. To the first rank belongs the amethystos [So called, according to some authorities, from ἀ, “not,” μεθύω, “to intoxicate,” on account of its being a supposed preservative against inebriety. Ajasson is of opinion that Pliny does not here speaks of the Quartz Amethyst of modern mineralogy, but only the Oriental Amethyst, violet Sapphire, or violet Corundum. It is not improbable, however, that he includes them all, as well as violet Fluor spar, and some other purple stones; inclusive, possibly, of the Garnet.] of India; a stone which is also found in the part of Arabia that adjoins Syria and is known as Petra, as also in Lesser Armenia, Egypt, and Galatia; the very worst of all, and the least valued, being those of Thasos and Cyprus. The name which these stones bear, originates, it is said, in the peculiar tint of their brilliancy, which, after closely approaching the colour of wine, passes off into a violet without being fully pronounced; or else, according to some authorities, in the fact that in their purple there is something that falls short of a fiery colour, the tints fading off and inclining to the colour of wine.

All these stones are transparent and of an agreeable violet colour, and are easy [He is probably speaking here of violet Fluor spar; Oriental amethyst, or violet sapphire, it is next to impossible to engrave.] to engrave. Those of India have in perfection the very richest shades of purple, and it is to attain this colour that the dyers [See B. ix. c. 62.] in purple direct all their endeavours; it presenting a fine mellowed appearance to the eye, and not dazzling the sight, as in the case with the colours of the carbunculus. Another variety approaches more nearly the hyacinth in colour: the people of India call this tint “socon,” and the stone itself “socondion.” A third stone of this class is of a more diluted colour, and is known as “sapenos,” being identical with “pharanitis,” so called from a country [The city of Pharan, mentioned by St. Jerome and Eusebius.] on the frontiers of Arabia that produces it. Of a fourth kind, the colour is like that of wine; and in a fifth it borders very closely upon that of crystal, the purple gradually passing off into white. This last kind is but little valued; for a fine amethyst should always have, when viewed sideways [“In suspectu.” See B. xxi. c. 22.] and held up to the light, a certain purple refulgence, like that of carbunculus, slightly inclining to a tint of rose.

Some prefer giving these stones the name of “pæderos” [“Lovely youth.” The Opal has been thus called in Chapter.] or of “anteros,” [“Avenger of slighted love.”] while to many they are known as “Venus’ [“Veneris gena;” called in Greek “Aphrodites blepharon.”] eyelid,” a name which would seem to be particularly appropriate to the colour and general appearance of the gem. The falsehoods of the magicians would persuade us that these stones are preventive of inebriety, and that it is from this that they have derived [Which is most probable; however untrue the story itself may be. See Note above.] their name. They tell us also, that if we inscribe the names of the sun and moon upon this stone, and then wear it suspended from the neck, with some hair of the cynocephalus [A kind of Baboon. See B. vi. c. 35, B. vii. c. 2, and B. viii. c. 80.] and feathers of the swallow, it will act as a preservative against all noxious spells. It is said too, that worn in any manner, this stone will ensure access to the presence of kings; and that it will avert hail and the attacks of locusts, if a certain prayer is also repeated which they mention. They make similar promises, too, in reference to the smaragdus, if graven with the figure of an eagle or of a scarabæus: statements which, in my opinion, they cannot have committed to writing without a feeling of contempt and derision for the rest of mankind.

### Chap. 41.—Hyacinthos.

Very different from this stone is hyacinthos, [It is considered very doubtful whether the modern Hyacinth or Zircon is one of the number of stones that were called “Hyacinthus” by the ancients. Jameson appears to have thought that they gave this name to the oriental amethyst or violet sapphire.] though partaking of a colour that closely borders upon it. The great difference between them is, that the brilliant violet which is so refulgent in the amethystos, is diluted in the other stone. Though pleasing at first sight, its beauty fades before the eye is satiated; indeed, so far is it from satisfying the sight, that it almost wholly fails to attract the eye, its lustre disappearing more rapidly than the tints of the flower [See B. xxi. c. 38.] known by the same name.

### Chap. 42.—Chrysolithos: Seven Varieties of It.

Æthiopia, which produces hyacinthos, produces chrysolithos [Generally supposed to be the Oriental topaz, yellow Sapphire or yellow Corundum. We have already seen, in Chapter, that the “Topazos” of the ancients was in all probability the modern Chrysolite.] also, a transparent stone with a refulgence like that of gold. The stones of India are the most highly esteemed, as also those found among the Tibareni, [In Pontus: see B. vi. c. 4.] provided these last are not of a mottled hue. The worst in quality are those of Arabia, the colour of them being turbid and mottled, and their brilliancy interrupted by cloudy spots: even too, when they happen to be limpid, they have all the appearance of being full, as it were, of a peculiar dust. The best stones are those which, when placed by the side of gold, impart to it a sort of whitish hue, and so give it the appearance of silver. When this is the case, they are set in a bezel that is open on either side; but when the stone is of inferior quality, a ground of aurichalcum [See B. xxxiv. c..] is placed beneath.

### Chap. 43.—Chryselectrum.

Though it has now altogether gone out of use for jewellery, there is a precious stone known as “chryselectrum,” [Supposed to be yellow-white Hyacinth. See Chapter of this Book.] the colour of which inclines to that of amber; [“Electrum.”] but only when viewed by a morning [See Chapter of this Book.] light. The stones of Pontus are known by their lightness. Some of them are hard and reddish, while others, again, are soft and of a soiled appearance. According to Bocchus, these stones are found in Spain as well; in a spot where, according to him, fossil crystal has been discovered, in sinking to the water-level for wells. [See Chapter of this Book.] He tells us also that he once saw a chrysolithos twelve [Yellow quartz crystal probably, or False topaz.] pounds in weight.

### Chap. 44.—Leucochrysos: Four Varieties of It.

There is also a stone known as “leucochrysos,” [“White gold stone.” It has not been identified.] with a white vein running across it. To this class, too, belongs capnias; [“Smoke-stone.” A jasper has been so called in Chapter.] a stone also which resembles glass in appearance; and another which reflects a tint like that of saffron. These stones are imitated in glass, to such a degree of perfection, that it is impossible to distinguish them by the eye. The touch, however, detects the difference, the imitation being not so cold as the real stone.

### Chap. 45.—Melichrysos. Xuthon.

To this class also belongs melichrysos, [“Honey gold stone.” Some are of opinion that this was the Honey-coloured Hyacinth. Others, again, identify it with the yellow, honey-coloured Topaz; an opinion with which Ajasson coincides.] a stone which has all the appearance of pure honey, seen through transparent gold. India produces these stones, and, although hard, they are very brittle, but not unpleasing to the sight. The same country, too, produces xuthon, [“Xanthon” is another reading. See Chapter of this Book.] a stone much used by the lower classes there.

### Chap. 46.—Pæderos, Sangenon, or Tenites.

At the very head of the white stones is pæderos; [“Lovely youth.” See Chapter, where it has been already mentioned. He here reverts to the Opals.] though it may still be questionable to which of the colours it in reality belongs. As to the name, it has been so much bandied about among other precious stones of conspicuous beauty, that it has quite assumed the privilege of being a synonymous term [See Chapter, for example, where it is given to a variety of the Amethyst.] for all that is charming to the eye. Still, however, there is one [The Opal, which he is about to describe.] stone in particular which fully merits all the commendation that might be expected for a stone with so prepossessing a name: for in itself it reunites the transparency of crystal, the peculiar green of the sky, the deep tints of purple, and a sort of bright reflex, like that of a golden-coloured wine; a reflex, indeed, that is always the last to meet the eye, but is always crowned with the lustrous hues of purple. The stone, in fact, has all the appearance of having been bathed in each of these tints, individually, and yet in the whole of them at once. There is no precious stone either that has a clearer water than this, or that presents a more pleasing sweetness to the eye.

Pæderos of the finest quality comes from India, where it is known as “sangenon;” the next best being that of Egypt, called “tenites.” That of third-rate quality is found in Arabia, but it is rough upon the surface. Next, we have the stone of Pontus, the radiance of which is softer than in that of Thasos, which, in its turn, is of a more mellowed colour than the stones of Galatia, Thrace, and Cyprus. The defects commonly found in these stones are, a want of brilliancy, a confusion with colours which do not properly belong to them, and the other imperfections which are found in stones in general. [See Chapter of this Book.]

### Chap. 47.—Asteria.

Next among the white stones is “asteria,” [The vitreous Asteriated crystals of Sapphire are still called by this name. Ajasson, however, and Desfontaines, identify this gem with Girasol opal or fire opal. See Note.] a gem which holds its high rank on account of a certain peculiarity in its nature, it having a light enclosed within, in the pupil of an eye as it were. This light, which has all the appearance of moving within the stone, it transmits according to the angle of inclination at which it is held; now in one direction, and now in another. When held facing the sun, it emits white rays like those of a star, and to this, in fact, it owes its name. [From ἀστερ, a star.] The stones of India are very difficult to engrave, those of Carmania being preferred.

### Chap. 48.—Astrion.

Of a similar white radiance is the stone that is known as “astrion,” [“Star-stone.” Ajasson identifies this stone with the Asteriated Sapphire or Corundum, mentioned in Note above.] closely resembling crystal in its nature, and found in India and upon the coasts of Pallene. [See B. iv. cc. 10, 17.] In the centre of it there shines internally a brilliant star, with a refulgence like that of the moon when full. Some will have it that this stone receives its name from the fact that, when held opposite to the stars, it absorbs the light they emit and then returns it. The finest stones, they say, are those of Carmania, there being none more entirely free from all defects. They add, also, that a stone of inferior quality is known as “ceraunia,” [“Lightning darting.”] and that, in the worst of all, the light is very similar to that given by a lamp.

### Chap. 49.—Astriotes.

Astriotes, [“Star-like.” Ajasson thinks, that it is identical with the stone next mentioned.] too, is a stone that is highly esteemed, and Zoroaster, they say, has sung its wondrous praises as an adjunct of the magic art.

### Chap. 50.—Astrobolos.

Sudines says, that astrobolos [“Planet-stricken.” It is not improbable that this was Cat’s-eye, a translucent Chalcedony, presenting a peculiar opalescence, or internal reflections, when cut en cabochon. The colour is either bright-greenish grey, or else yellow, red, or brownish.] resembles the eye of a fish in appearance, and that it has a radiant white refulgence when viewed in the sun.

### Chap. 51.—Ceraunia; Four Varieties of It.

Among the white stones also, there is one known as “ceraunia,” [See Note above. Parisot thinks that these must have been Aërolites or Meteorites.] which absorbs the brilliancy of the stars. It is of a crystalline formation, of a lustrous azure colour, and is a native of Carmania. Zenothemis admits that it is white, but asserts that it has the figure of a blazing star within. Some of them, he says, are dull, in which case it is the custom to steep them for some days in a mixture of nitre and vinegar; at the end of which period the star makes its appearance, but gradually dies away by the end of as many months.

Sotacus mentions also two other varieties of ceraunia, one black and the other red; and he says that they resemble axes in shape. Those which are black and round, [Brotero thinks that these were petrified shells, to which the magicians imputed marvellous properties.] he says, are looked upon as sacred, and by their assistance cities and fleets are attacked and taken: the name given to them is “bætyli,” those of an elongated form being known as “cerauniæ.” [Brotero is of opinion that those were Belemnites, more commonly known as “thunderstones.” The reading “bætyli” is doubtful; but Parisot says, on what authority does not appear, that “Betylus” meant “Great father,” and that this name, as well as “Abaddir” of similar signification, was given by magicians to aërolites or meteorites used in their enchantments.] They make out also that there is another kind, rarely to be met with, and much in request for the practices of magic, it never being found in any place but one that has been struck by lightning. [A meteoric stone or aërolite, evidently.]

### Chap. 52.—Iris; Two Varieties of It.

The next name mentioned by these authors is that of the stone called “iris;” [“Rainbow.” Opinion seems divided as to whether this is Hyalin quartz iridized internally, or prismatic crystals of Limpid quartz, which decompose the rays of the sun.] which is found, in a fossil state, in a certain island of the Red Sea, forty miles distant from the city of Berenice. It is partly composed of crystal, and hence it is that some have called it “root of crystal.” It takes its name “iris” from the properties which it possesses; for, when struck by the rays of the sun in a covered spot, it projects upon the nearest walls the form and diversified colours of the rainbow; continually changing its tints, and exciting admiration by the great variety of colours which it presents. That it is hexahedral in form, like crystal, is generally agreed; but some say that it is rough on the sides and of unequal angles; and that, when exposed to a full sun, it disperses the rays that are thrown upon it, while at the same time, by throwing out a certain brightness [The reading and meaning of this passage are very doubtful.] before it, it illumines all objects that may happen to be adjacent. The stone, however, as already stated, only presents these colours when under cover; not as though they were in the body of the stone itself, but, to all appearance, as if they were the result of the reflected light upon the surface of the wall. The best kind is the one that produces the largest arcs, with the closest resemblance to the rainbow.

“Iritis” is the name of another stone, similar to the last in all other respects, but remarkable for its extreme hardness. Horus says, in his writings, that this stone, calcined and triturated, is a remedy for the bite of the ichneumon, and that it is a native of Persia.
