---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 23-54."
chapter_order: 192
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 23.—Alectoroslophos or Crista: Two Remedies.

Alectoroslophos, [“Cock’s comb.” The Rhinanthus crista galli of Linnæus, Yellow rattle, or cock’s comb.] or crista, [“Crest” or “Comb.”] as we call it, has numerous leaves resembling a cock’s comb, a thin stem, and a black seed enclosed in pods. Boiled with broken beans and honey, it is useful for cough and for films upon the eyes. The seed, too, is sprinkled whole into the eyes, and so far is it from injuring them, that it attracts and collects the filmy matter. When thus used, it changes colour, and from black becomes white, gradually swells, and comes out of itself.

### Chap. 24. (6.)—Alum, Also Called Symphyton Petræon: Fourteen Remedies.

The plant which we call “alum,” [Identified by Desfontaines with the Symphytum officinale, or Great comfrey. Fée, however, considers it to be the Coris Monspeliensis of Linnæus, Montpellier coris. Lobel identifies it with the Prunella vulgaris of Linnæus, Common self-heal, and Cæsalpinus with the Hyssopus officinalis of Linnæus. See B. xxvi. c. 26.] and which is known to the Greeks as “symphyton [Fée reiterates his assertion here that this “rock” symphytum is a totally different plant from the Symphytum officinale, or Comfrey, though they appear to have been generally considered as identical by Scribonius Largus, Plinius Valerianus, Apuleius, and other writers.] petræon,” is similar to cunila bubula [See B. xxvi. c. 26.] in appearance, having a diminutive leaf and three or four branches springing from the root, with tops like those of thyme. It is a ligneous plant, odoriferous, of a sweet flavour, and provocative of saliva: the root of it is long and red. It grows upon rocks, to which circumstance it is indebted for its additional name of “petræon;” and is extremely useful [This account of its medicinal properties applies properly to the Symphytum officinale, or Great comfrey, a plant which would appear to have been confounded by Pliny with the Alum, if Fée is right in his conjecture.] for affections of the sides and kidneys, griping pains in the bowels, diseases of the chest and lungs, spitting of blood, and eruptions of the fauces. The root is pounded and taken in drink, or else a decoction is made of it in wine; sometimes, also, it is applied externally. Chewed, it allays thirst, and is particularly refreshing to the pulmonary organs. It is employed topically for sprains and contusions, and has a soothing effect upon the intestines.

Cooked upon hot ashes, with the follicules removed, and then beaten up with nine peppercorns and taken in water, it acts astringently upon the bowels. For the cure of wounds it is remarkably efficacious, being possessed of agglutinating [Hence its Latin name “consolida,” and its French name “consoude.” Fée says that Comfrey still figures in the French Materia Medica, and that the lower classes use it in most of the cases mentioned by Pliny; he states also, that it is destitute of energetic properties, in a medicinal point of view.] properties to such a remarkable degree as to solder pieces of meat together with which it is boiled; to which, in fact, it is indebted for its Greek name. [Σύμφυτον, “consolidating.”] It is used also for the cure of fractured bones.

### Chap. 25. (7.)—Alga Rufa or Red Sea-weed: One Remedy.

Red sea-weed [See B. xiii. c. 48, and B. xxvi. c. 66.] is useful as an application for the sting of the scorpion.

### Chap. 26.—Actæa: One Remedy.

Actæa [The Actæa spicata of Linnæus, Herb-christopher or bane-berries, is mentioned by Desfontaines; but Fée is inclined to identify it with the Sambucus ebulus of Linnæus, the Dwarf elder, wall-wort, or dane-wort.] has leaves with a powerful smell, rough knotted stems, a black seed like that of ivy, and soft berries. It grows in umbrageous, rugged, watery localities; and is used, in doses of one full acetabulum, for female complaints.

### Chap. 27.—The Ampelos Agria, or Wild Vine: Four Remedies.

Ampelos agria, or wild vine, is the name of a plant with leaves of an ashy colour, as already [See B. xxiii. c. 14.] stated in our description of the cultivated plants, and long, tough twigs of a red hue, like that of the flower which we have mentioned, [In B. xxi. cc. 33, 38.] when speaking of violets, under the name of “flame of Jove.” It bears a seed which resembles the grains of the pomegranate. The root, boiled in three cyathi of water, with the addition of two cyathi of Coan wine, is slightly laxative to the bowels, and is consequently given for dropsy. It is curative also of uterine affections, and of spots upon the face in females. It is found a good plan for patients afflicted with sciatica to use the juice of this plant, bruised, applied topically, with the leaves.

### Chap. 28.—Absinthium or Wormwood; Four Varieties: Forty-eight Remedies.

There are numerous kinds of absinthium; the Santonic, [The Artemisia Santonica of Linnæus, Tartarian southernwood.] for instance, so called from a city in Gaul, and the Pontic, [The Artemisia Pontica of Linnæus, Little wormwood, or Roman wormwood.] which comes from Pontus, where the cattle are fattened upon it—a diet which causes them to be destitute of gall. [See B. xi. c. 75.] The Pontic wormwood, we may remark, is of the finest quality, superior to that of Italy, [The Artemisia absinthium of Linnæus, Common wormwood.] and much more bitter; the pith, however, of the Pontic wormwood is sweet. As to its general utility, a plant so commonly found and applied to such numerous uses, people are universally agreed; but with the Romans more particularly it has been always held in the highest esteem, from the fact of its being employed in their religious ceremonials. Thus, for instance, upon the Latin [Upon which occasion a sacrifice was offered on the Alban Mount. See further as to this Festival, in B. iii. c. 2.] Festival, it is the custom to have a race of four-horsed chariots in the Capital, and for the conqueror to be presented with a draught of wormwood; from the circumstance, no doubt, that our forefathers were of opinion that good health was the most valuable reward they could bestow upon his skill.

This plant is very strengthening to the stomach, and hence it is that wines are flavoured with it, as already [In B. xiv. c. 19. Wine of wormwood is still used medicinally.] stated. A decoction of it in water is also taken, the following being the method employed in preparing it. Six drachmæ of the leaves are boiled, with the branches, in three sextarii of rain water, and the preparation is then left to cool in the open air a day and a night. Salt, too, should be added to it. When old, it is utterly useless. A dilution of wormwood steeped in water is also used, such being the name [“Dilutum.” An infusion.] given to this method of preparing it. This dilution is made by leaving the vessel covered up for three days, any kind of water being used. Pounded wormwood is but rarely employed, and the same with the extracted juice of the seed. [It contains a small quantity of essential oil.] In cases, however, where it is extracted, the seed is subjected to pressure as soon as it begins to swell, after which it is soaked for three days in water, if used fresh, and seven, if dry. It is then boiled in a copper vessel, in the proportion of ten heminæ to forty-five sextarii of water, after which it is strained off and boiled gently to the consistency of honey, in the same way as the juice is extracted from the smaller centaury. The juice, however, of wormwood, thus extracted, is bad for the head and stomach; whereas the decoction, on the other hand, is wholesome in the highest degree, as it acts astringently upon the stomach, carries off bile, is a powerful diuretic, has a soothing effect upon the bowels, and assuages pains in the intestines. With the addition of sile, [See B. xx. c. 18.] Gallic nard, and a little vinegar, it dispels nausea and flatulency, and expels intestinal worms. It removes qualmishness, promotes the digestion, and, with the addition of rue, pepper, and salt, disperses crudities of the stomach.

The ancients were in the habit of giving wormwood as a purgative, the dose being six drachmæ of the seed with three of salt and one cyathus of honey, in one sextarius of sea water kept for some time. This preparation, however, is rendered more efficacious by doubling the proportion of salt; the seed, too, must be bruised with the greatest care, as there is considerable difficulty in pounding it. Some authorities have prescribed the dose above mentioned to be given in polenta, [See B. xviii. c. 14.] with the addition of pennyroyal; while others recommend the leaves to be given to children in a dried fig, to disguise their bitterness. Taken with iris, [See B. xxi. c. 19.] wormwood acts as a detergent upon the thoracic organs: for jaundice it is used raw, with parsley or adiantum. [See B. xxii. c. 30.] In cases of flatulency, it is sipped every now and then, warmed in water; for liver complaints it is taken with Gallic nard, and for diseases of the spleen, with vinegar, pap, [“Puls.” See B. xviii. c. 19.] or figs. Taken in vinegar it neutralizes the bad effects of fungi and of viscus: [From a passage in Scribonius Largus, c. 191, it has been concluded that by the word “visco,” he means the juice of the Ixias or Chamæleon, mentioned in B. xxii. c. 21.] in wine it is an antidote to the poison of hemlock, and to the bite of the shrew-mouse, and is curative of wounds inflicted by the sea-dragon [See B. ix. c. 43, and B. xxxii. c. 53.] and the scorpion. It contributes also very greatly to the improvement of the sight, and is used as an external application, with raisin wine, for defluxions of the eyes, and with honey, for bruises.

The steam of a decoction of wormwood is curative of affections of the ears; and when they are attacked with running sores, a liniment of wormwood bruised with honey is applied. Three or four sprigs of wormwood, with one root of Gallic nard, taken in six cyathi of water, act as a diuretic and as an emmenagogue; indeed, if taken with honey, or employed as a pessary with wool, it has especial virtues as an emmenagogue. In combination with honey and nitre it is useful for quinzy, and an infusion of it in water is good for epinyctis. A topical application is made of it for recent wounds, provided always they have not been touched with water: it is employed also for ulcers upon the head. In combination with Cyprian wax or figs, it is highly recommended as a plaster for the iliac regions: it is curative also of prurigo, but it must never be administered in fevers. Taken in drink, it is a preventive of sea sickness; and, worn attached to the body, beneath an apron, it arrests inguinal swellings. The smell of it [This, Fée observes, is not the case.] induces sleep, a similar effect being produced by placing it under the pillow unknown to the party. Kept among clothes it preserves them from worms, and used as a liniment, with oil, or burnt as a fumigation, it has the effect of driving away gnats.

Writing ink, mixed with an infusion of wormwood, effectually protects the writings from the attacks of mice. Ashes of wormwood, mixed with rose unguent, stain the hair black.

### Chap. 29.—Absinthium Marinum or Seriphum.

There is a sea wormwood [The Artemisia maritima of Linnæus, Sea wormwood: see B. xxxii. c. 31] also, known as “seriphum” by some, the most esteemed being that of Taposiris in Egypt. Those initiated in the mysteries of Isis carry a branch of it in the hand. It has a narrower leaf than the preceding plant, and is not so bitter; it is injurious to the stomach, has a laxative effect upon the bowels, and expels intestinal worms. It is taken in drink with oil and salt; or else an infusion of it is taken in a pottage made of meal of three-month wheat. When employed as a decoction, a handful is used to one sextarius of water, the mixture being boiled down to one half.

### Chap. 30. (8.)—The Ballotes, Melamprasion, or Black Leek: Three Remedies.

The Greeks give to the ballotes [The Ballota nigra of Linnæus, the Fetid ballota, or Stinking black horehound; see B. xx. c. 89.] the other name of “melamprasion,” meaning “black leek.” [He is in error here, as the word “melamprasion” means “black horehound.” “Black leek” would be “melamprason.”] It is a branchy plant, with black angular stems, covered with hairy leaves, larger and darker than those of the leek, [“Horehound,” properly. The Ballota is of a stimulating nature, and contains a considerable quantity of essential oil.] and possessed of a powerful smell. The leaves, bruised and applied with salt, are highly efficacious for bites inflicted by dogs: cooked upon hot ashes and applied in a cabbage leaf, they are curative of condylomata. Mixed with honey, this plant acts as a detergent upon sordid ulcers.

### Chap. 31.—Botrys, Ambrosia, or Artemisia: One Remedy.

Botrys [The Chenopodium botrys of Linnæus, Cut-leaved goose foot, or oak of Jerusalem. See B. xxv. c. 36, and c. 11 of this Book.] is a shrublike plant, which has small yellow branches, with the seed growing all round them, and leaves resembling [There is no such resemblance. The name “botrys” was given to the plant from the little clusters formed by the blossoms.] those of endive. It is found upon the banks of running streams, and is used for the cure of hardness of breathing. The people of Cappadocia call this plant “ambrosia,” others again, “artemisia.”

### Chap. 32.—The Brabyla: One Remedy.

The brabyla [Identified by Fée with the Prunus domestica of Linnæus, var. β, or Damascena, the Damascene plum or damson. Desfontaines considers it to be the Prunus instititia, the Bullace plum. Holland mentions in a Note, “Bullois, skegs, or such like wild plums.”] is possessed of astringent properties like those of the quince, but beyond this, authors give no particulars relative to it.

### Chap. 33.—Bryon Maritimum: Five Remedies.

Sea bryon [The Ulva lactuca of Linnæus, Lettuce laver; see B. xiii. c. 49, B. xxiv. c. 17, and B. xxxii. c. 36.] is a plant, no doubt, [He probably says this in reference to the opinion expressed by Theophrastus, Hist. iv. 7, that it was a name for sea-weed in general, and not a specific plant.] with leaves like those of the lettuce, of a wrinkled, pursed appearance, and destitute of stem, the leaves arising from a single root: it grows upon rocks more particularly, and shells sunk in the sand. It has desiccative [In reality, it is destitute of medicinal properties. Some kinds of laver are considered a dainty food.] and astringent qualities in a very high degree, properties which render it useful for reducing all kinds of abscesses and inflammations, those attendant upon gout in particular. It is good also for all affections which stand in need of cooling applications.

### Chap. 34.—The Bupleuron: One Remedy.

I find it stated that seed of bupleuron [See B. xxii. c. 35.] is given for injuries inflicted by serpents; and that the wound is fomented with a decoction of the plant, in combination with leaves of the mulberry or of origanum. [See B. xx. c. 67.]

### Chap. 35.—The Catanance; One Observation Upon It. The Cemos: One Observation Upon It.

The catanance [Dioscorides speaks of two kinds of Catanance; one of which has been identified by Sprengel with the Ornithopus compressus of Linnæus, and the other with the Astragalus pugniformis. Fée expresses his doubts as to the correctness of these conclusions.] is a Thessalian plant, which it would be a mere loss of time to describe, seeing that it is only used as an ingredient in philtres. In order, however, to expose the follies of the magical art, it may not be out of place to remark that this plant has been selected for the above-named purpose, from the fact that, as it withers, it gradually contracts and assumes the shape of the claws of a dead kite. [“As if it would catch women, and hold them fast perforce.”— Holland. It has been suggested that the Coronopus, or “crow’s foot,” mentioned in B. xxi. c. 59, was so called for a similar reason.]

For a similar reason we shall give no description of the plant called “cemos.” [Prosper Alpinus identifies it with the Plantago Cretica of Linnæus, and Sprengel with the Micropus erectus of Linnæus. Fée considers it to be the Gnaphalium leontopodium of Lamarck.]

### Chap. 36.—The Calyx: Three Remedies.

Of the calyx [Other readings are “calsa,” and “calla;” but “calyx” is supported by the text of Dioscorides, B. iv. c. 23. The first kind has been generally identified with the Arum arisarum of Linnæus, Hooded arum, or Monk’s hood, and is identical probably with the Aris aros of B. xxiv. c. 94.] there are two kinds. One of these resembles arum, and is found growing in ploughed soils; the proper time for gathering it being before it begins to wither. It is employed for the same purposes as arum; [See B. xxiv. c. 93.] and an infusion of the root is taken as a purgative and as an emmenagogue. The stalks, boiled with the leaves and some pulse, are curative of tenesmus.

### Chap. 37.—The Calyx, Known Also as Anchusa Ok Onoclïa: Two Remedies.

The other [Probably the Anchusa tinctoria of Linnæus, Dyer’s alkanet. See B. xxii. c. 23.] kind of calyx is known by some persons as “anchusa,” and by others as “onoclia.” The leaves are like those of the lettuce, but longer, and with a downy surface. The root is red, and is employed topically, in combination with fine polenta, [“Flore polentæ.” See B. xviii. c. 14.] for the cure of erysipelas: taken internally with white wine, it is good for affections of the liver.

### Chap. 38.—The Circæa: Three Remedies.

The circæa [Sprengel identifies it with the Asclepias nigra, Black swallow-wort, but Fée considers it to be the Circæa Lutetiana of Linnæus, Parisian circæa, or enchanter’s nightshade. Other authorities have suggested the Capsicum annuum of Linnæus, Indian or Guinea pepper, and the Celosia margaritacea of Linnæus, Pearly celosia, or cock’s comb. M. Fraäs suggests, though with some doubt, the Cynanchum Monspeliacum, the Montpellier dog’s-bane.] resembles the cultivated trychnon [See B. xxi. c. 105.] in appearance. It has a small swarthy flower, a diminutive seed, like millet, growing in small horn-shaped pods, and a root half a foot in length, generally triple or fourfold, white, odoriferous, and hot in the mouth. It is found growing upon rocks exposed to the sun. An infusion of it is prepared with wine, and administered for pains and affections of the uterus: to make it, three ounces of the pounded root should be steeped in three sextarii of wine a day and a night. This potion is effectual also for bringing away the after-birth. The seed of this plant, taken in wine or hydromel, diminishes the milk in nursing women.

### Chap. 39.—The Cirsion: One Remedy.

The cirsion [Identified with the Carduus parviflorus of Linnæus, the Small-flowered thistle.] is a plant consisting of a diminutive and delicate stem, two cubits in height, of a triangular form, and covered with prickly leaves. The prickles on the leaves are downy, and the leaves themselves resemble those of buglossos [See B. xxv. c. 40.] in shape, but are smaller, and of a whitish colour. At the summit of the plant there are small purple heads, which fall off in the shape of down. This plant or the root of it, worn as an amulet, it is said, is curative of the pains attendant upon varicose veins.

### Chap. 40.—The Cratægonon; Two Kinds of It: Eight Remedies.

The cratægonon [Identified by Fée and Desfontaines with the Polygonum persicaria of Linnæus, the Spotted persicaria, red-shanks, fleawort, or lakeweed. Littré gives the Crucianella Monspeliaca of Linnæus, Montpellier petty madder.] is similar to an ear of corn in appearance. It is formed of numerous shoots, springing from a single root, and full of joints. It grows in umbrageous localities, and has a seed like that of millet, with a remarkably acrid taste. If a man and woman, before the evening meal, take three oboli of this seed in three cyathi of water, for forty days consecutively, before the conception of their issue, it will be sure to be of the male [Hence its name, signifying that it strengthens the generative powers.] sex, they say.

There is another cratægonon, known also as “thelygonos,” [See B. xxvi. c. 91.] and distinguished from the last mentioned plant by the mildness of the taste. Some persons assert that females, if they take the blossom of this plant in drink, will be sure to conceive before the end of forty days. These plants, used in combination with honey, are curative of black ulcers of a chronic nature; they also fill the concavities made by fistulous ulcers with new flesh, and restore such parts of the body as are wasted by atrophy. They act as a detergent upon purulent sores, disperse inflammatory tumours, and alleviate gout and all kind of abscesses, those of the mamillæ in particular.

Under the name of “cratægos” [See B. xxiv. c. 72. Littré remarks that Pliny is in error here, for that the Cratægos of Theophrastus is the Cratægos azarolia of Linnæus, the Parsley-leaved hawthorn, while the Aquifolia of Pliny is the Holly. As to the latter point, see B. xvi. cc. 8, 12.] or “cratægon,” Theophrastus [Hist. Plant. B. iii. c. 15.] speaks of the tree known in Italy as the “aquifolia.”

### Chap. 41.—The Crocodileon: Two Remedies.

The crocodileon [Desfontaines identifies it with the Centaurea crocodileum of Linnæus, and Littré with the Carduus pycnocephalus of Linnæus. Ruellius considers it to be the same plant as the Leucacantha of Dioscorides; which Sprengel identifies with the Cnicus Casabonæ. Fée expresses himself at a loss as to its identity.] resembles the black chamæleon [See B. xxii. c. 21.] in shape: the root is long, of an uniform thickness, and possessed of a pungent smell. It is found growing in sandy soils. Taken in drink, it causes a copious discharge of coagulated blood at the nostrils, and in this way, it is said, diminishes the volume of the spleen.

### Chap. 42.—The Cynosorchis or Orchis: Four Remedies.

The cynosorchis, [“Dog’s testicle.” Considered to be a synonym merely of the Orchis, mentioned in B. xxvi. c. 62.] by some called “orchis,” has leaves like [This comparison is totally incorrect.] those of the olive, soft, three in number, half a foot in length, and lying upon the ground. The root is bulbous, oblong, and divided into two portions, [See B. xxvi. c. 62.] the upper one hard, and the lower one soft. These roots are eaten boiled, like bulbs, [Or onions.] and are mostly found growing in vineyards. If males eat the upper part, they will be parents of male issue, they say, and females, if they eat the lower part, of female. In Thessaly, the men take the soft portion in goats’ milk as an aphrodisiac, and the hard part as an antaphrodisiac. Of these parts, the one effectually neutralizes the action of the other. [A tissue of groundless superstitions.]

### Chap. 43.—The Chrysolachanum; Two Varieties of It: Three Remedies. Coagulum Terræ: Two Remedies.

The chrysolachanum [“Golden vegetable.” Supposed to be identical with the Atriplex of B. xx. c. 38, our Orage.] grows in pine plantations, and is similar to the lettuce in appearance. It heals wounds of the sinews, if applied without delay. There is another kind [Cultivated orage, probably.] of chrysolachanum mentioned, with a golden flower, and a leaf like that of the cabbage: it is boiled and eaten as a laxative vegetable. This plant, worn as an amulet by a patient suffering from jaundice, provided it be always kept in sight, is a cure for that disease, it is said. I am not certain whether this is all that might be said about the chrysolachanum, but, at all events, it is all that I have found respecting it; for it is a very general fault on the part of our more recent herbalists, to confine their account of plants to the mere name, with a very meagre description of the peculiar features of the plant,—just as though, forsooth, they were universally known. Thus, they tell us, for instance, that a plant known as “coagulum [“Earth rennet.” This plant has not been identified. Lobelius has made a guess at the Serapias abortiva of Linnæus, the Helleborine. It is pretty clear that it was unknown to Pliny himself.] terræ,” acts astringently upon the bowels, and that it dispels strangury, taken in water or in wine.

### Chap. 44.—The Cucubalus, Strumus, or Strychnon: Six Remedies.

The leaves of the cucubalus, [The same, probably, as the Trychnon of B. xxi. cc. 52, 105, Solanum nigrum or Black nightshade. In the former editions the reading is “cuculus.”] they tell us, bruised with vinegar, are curative of the stings of serpents and of scorpions. Some persons call this plant by the name of “strumus,” [The “strumous” or “scrofula” plant.] while others give it the Greek name of “strychnon:” its berries are black. The juice of these berries, administered in doses of one cyathus, in two cyathi of honied wine, is curative of lumbago; an infusion of them with rose oil is used for headache, and they are employed as an application for scrofulous sores.

### Chap. 45.—The Conferva: Two Remedies.

The conferva [Possibly the Conferva rivularis, or the C. glomerata of Linnæus, the River conferva or River sponge, or the Green cluster conferva.] is peculiar to running streams, those of the Alpine regions more particularly; receiving its name from “conferrumino,” [On account of its asserted agglutinative properties. In reality it is an inert plant, and is never used in medicine.] to solder together. Properly speaking, it is rather a fresh-water sponge than a moss or a plant, being a dense, porous mass of filaments. I know an instance where a man, who fell to the ground while lopping a tree of considerable height, and broke nearly every bone of his body, was cured by the agency of this plant. The patient’s body was covered all over with conferva, the application being continually sprinkled with water the moment it began to dry, and only removed for the purpose of changing it when the plant gave signs of losing its virtues. [Fée considers this statement as fabulous in every respect.] It is hardly credible with what rapidity he recovered.

### Chap. 46. (9.)—The Coccus Cnidius, or Grain of Cnidos: Two Remedies.

The Cnidian grain [See B. xiii. c. 35.] has just the colour of the kermes berry. [“Coccus.” See B. xvi. c. 12.] It is larger than a peppercorn, and has very heating properties: hence it is that when used, it is taken in crumb of bread, that it may not burn the throat in passing downwards. It is a sovereign remedy for hemlock, and arrests [This is not the case. Sillig is of opinion that the passage is imperfect.] looseness of the bowels.

### Chap. 47.—The Dipsacos: Two Remedies.

The dipsacos [The same plant as the Labrum Venereum of B. xxv. c. 108. It is used for carding cloth, but is no longer employed in medicine.] has leaves like those of the lettuce, with prickly tubercles on the middle of the back. The stem of it, two cubits in length, is bristling all over with prickles of a similar nature. The joints of the stem are closely covered with two leaves, which form a concave axil in which a saltish dew-like liquid collects. [Hence its name “Venus’ bath.”] At the summit of the stem there are small heads covered with prickles: it grows in watery localities.

This plant is used for the cure of chaps of the fundament and of fistula; in which latter case the root is boiled down in wine to the consistency of wax, to allow of its being introduced into the fistula in the form of a salve. [“Collyrii.”] It is employed too, for the cure of all kinds of warts: as a liniment for which, the juice collected in the axils, as above mentioned, is also used by some.

### Chap. 48.—The Dryopteris: Two Remedies.

The dryopteris, [The same plant, probably, as the Polypodion of B. xxvi. c. 37. Littré, however, identifies it with the Asplenium adiantum nigrum of Linnæus, the Black maiden-hair, or spleenwort.] which resembles fern in appearance, is found growing upon trees; the leaves are of a somewhat sweetish [It is the root that is sweet, and not the leaves.] flavour and marked with slight indentations, and the root is hairy. This plant is possessed of caustic properties, [It has no such properties.] and hence the root is pounded and used as a depilatory. In using it the skin is rubbed with it till perspiration is excited, the operation being repeated a second and a third time, care being taken not to remove the perspiration.

### Chap. 49.—The Dryophonon.

The dryophonon [The “oak-killer.” Fée thinks that it may possibly be the Convallaria uniflora of Linnæus. Desfontaines names the Cochlearia draba and Littré the Lepidium draba of Linnæus.] is a similar plant, with thin stems a cubit in length, and surrounded on either side with leaves about as large as the thumb and like those of the oxymyrsine [See B. xv. cc. 7, 37, and B. xxiii. c. 83.] in appearance, only whiter and softer: the blossom is white, and similar to that of the elder. The shoots of it are eaten boiled, and the seed is used as a substitute for pepper.

### Chap. 50.—The Elatine: Two Remedies.

The elatine [Desfontaines and Fée identify it with the Antirrhinum spurium of Linnæus, Bastard toad-flax, calves’ snout, or snapdragon. Littré gives the Linaria Græca as its synonym.] has leaves like those of the helxine, [See B. xxii. c. 19.] diminutive, round, and hairy; its branches are small, half a foot in length, five or six in number, and covered with leaves from the root upwards. It grows in corn-fields, and has a rough flavour: hence it is found very useful for defluxions of the eyes, the leaves being beaten up and applied with polenta [See B. xviii. c. 14.] in a linen pledget. A decoction of this plant with linseed, taken in pottage, is good for dysentery.

### Chap. 51.—Empetros, by Our People Called Calcifraga: Four Remedies.

Empetros, [Fée, with Sprengel, identifies it with the Salsola polychlonos of Linnæus, Branchy saltwort or glasswort; Bauhin with the Passerina polygalifolia. The Crithmum maritimum of Linnæus, Sea samphire, has been suggested by Desfontaines. Littré gives the Frankenia pulverulenta of Linnæus. Holland suggests Saxifrage.] by the people of our country called “calcifraga,” [“Calculus-breaking.”] grows on mountains near the sea, and is generally found upon rocks: the nearer it grows to the sea the salter it is, acting as an evacuant of bile and pituitous secretions. That, on the other hand, which grows at a greater distance and more inland, is of a more bitter flavour. It carries off the aqueous humours of the body, being taken for that purpose in broth of some kind, or else hydromel. When old, it loses its strength; but used fresh, either boiled in water or pounded, it acts as a diuretic, and disperses urinary calculi. Authorities who wish full credence to be given to this asserted property, assure us that pebbles boiled with it will split asunder.

### Chap. 52.—The Epipactis or Elleborine: Two Remedies.

The epipactis, [See B. xiii. c. 35.] called “elleborine” by some, is a diminutive plant with small leaves. Taken in drink, it is extremely useful for diseases of the liver, and as an antidote to poisons.

### Chap. 53.—The Epimedion: Three Remedies.

The epimedion [Sprengel suggests the Marsilea quadrifolia of Linnæus; Columna the Botrychium lunaria of Linnæus; G. Bauhin the Ornithogalum Narbonense of Linnæus, Narbonese star of Bethlehem; and Talius the Caltha palustris of Linnæus, the Marsh marigold. Fée considers its identification impossible.] consists of a stem of moderate size, with ten or twelve leaves like those of ivy: it never flowers, and has a thin, black root, with a powerful smell. It grows in humid soils. This plant also has certain astringent and cooling properties, but females must be on their guard [Because it was said to be a cause of sterility.] against it. The leaves, beaten up in wine, prevent the bosom from growing too large in young girls.

### Chap. 54.—The Enneaphyllon: Two Remedies.

The enneaphyllon [Identified with the Dentaria enneaphylla of Linnæus, the Nine-leaved tooth-wort.] has nine long leaves, and is of a caustic nature. It is employed topically, but when used it is wrapped in wool to prevent it from cauterising further than desirable, for it blisters immediately. For lumbago and sciatica it is of the greatest utility.
