---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 33-52."
chapter_order: 108
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 33. (19.)—The Trees of Cyrenaica. The Paliurus.

The region of Cyrenaica places before the lotus its paliurus, [Probably the Rhamnus paliurus of Linnæus; the Spina Christi of other botanists.] which is more like a shrub in character, and bears a fruit of a redder colour. This fruit contains a nut, the kernel of which is eaten by itself, and is of a very agreeable flavour. The taste of it is improved by wine, and, in fact, the juices are thought to be an improvement to wine. The interior of Africa, as far as the Garamantes and the deserts, is covered with palms, remarkable for their extraordinary size and the lusciousness of their fruit. The most celebrated are those in the vicinity of the Temple of Jupiter Hammon.

### Chap. 34.—Nine Varieties of the Punic Apple. Balaustium.

But the vicinity of Carthage is claimed more particularly as its own by the fruit the name of which is the “Punic apple;” [The pomegranate, the Punica granatum of botanists.] though by some it is called “granatum.” [Or “grained apple.”] This fruit has been distinguished into a variety of kinds; the name of “apyrenum” [From the Greek ἀπύρηνον, “without kernel.” This Fée would not translate literally, but as meaning that by cultivation the grains had been reduced to a very diminutive size. See B. xxiii. c. 57.] being given to the one which has no [This variety appears to be extinct. Fée doubts if it ever existed.] woody seeds inside, but is naturally whiter than the others, the pips being of a more agreeable flavour, and the membranes by which they are separated not so bitter. Their conformation in other respects, which is very similar to the partitions of the cells in the honeycomb, is much the same in all. Of those that have a kernel there are five kinds, the sweet, the acrid, the mixed, the acid, and the vinous: those of Samos and Egypt are distinguished into those with red, and those with white foliage. [See B. xxiii. c. 57.] The skin, while the fruit is yet sour, is held in high esteem for tanning leather. The flower of this tree is known by the name of “balaustium,” and is very useful for medicinal purposes; [See B. xxiii. c. 60.] also for dyeing cloths a colour which from it has derived its name. [“Puniceus,” namely, a kind of purple.]

### Chap. 35. (20.)—The Trees of Asia and Greece; the Epipactis, the Erica, the Cnidian Grain or Thymelæa, Pyrosachne, Cnestron, or Cneoron.

In Asia and Greece are produced the following shrubs, the epipactis, [See B. xxvii. c. 52. Sprengel thinks that this is the Neottia spiralis of Schwartz; but Fée is of opinion that it has not hitherto been identified.] by some known as “elleborine,” the leaves of which are of small size, and when taken in drink, are an antidote against poison; just in the same way that those of the erica [Probably the Erica arborea of Linnæus, or “heath” in its several varieties.] are a specific against the sting of the serpent.

(21.) Here is also found another shrub, upon which grows the grain of Cnidos, [Granum Cnidium. The shrub is the Daphne Cnidium of Linnæus.] by some known as “linum;” the name of the shrub itself being thymelæa, [The “thyme-olive.”] while others, again, call it “chamelæa”, [The “ground olive,” or “small olive.” Dioscorides makes a distinction between these two last; and Sprengel has followed it, naming the last Daphne Cnidium, and the first Daphne Cneorum.] others pyrosachne, others cnestron, and others cneorum; it bears a strong resemblance to the wild olive, but has a narrow leaf, which has a gummy taste in the mouth. The shrub is of about the size of the myrtle; its seed is of the same colour and appearance, but is solely used for medicinal purposes.

### Chap. 36.—The Tragion: Tragacanthe.

The island of Crete is the only place that produces the shrub called “tragion.” [See B. xxvii. c. 115.] It is similar in appearance to the terebinth; [He says elsewhere that it is like the juniper, which, however, is not the case. Guettard thinks that the tragion is the Androsæmon fetidum, the Hyperium hircinum of the modern botanists. Sprengel also adopts the same opinion. Fée is inclined to think that it was a variety of the Pistacia lentiscus.] a similarity which extends to the seed even, said to be remarkably efficacious for healing wounds made by arrows. The same island produces tragacanthe [Goat’s thorn. The Astragalus Creticus of Linnæus.] also, with a root which resembles that of the white thorn; it is very much preferred [He speaks of gum tragacanth.] to that which is grown in Media or in Achaia; the price at which it sells is three denarii per pound.

### Chap. 37.—The Tragos or Scorpio; the Myrica or Brya; the Ostrys.

Asia, too, produces the tragos [See B. xxvii. c. 116. Sprengel identifies it with the Salsola tragus of Linnæus.] or scorpio, a thorny shrub, destitute of leaves, with red clusters upon it that are employed in medicine. Italy produces the myrica, which some persons call the “tamarix;” [Probably the Tamarix Gallica of Linnæus. Fée says, in relation to the myrica, that it would seem that the ancients united in one collective name, several plants which resembled each other, not in their botanical characteristics, but in outward appearance. To this, he says, is owing the fact that Dioscorides calls the myrica a tree, Favorinus a herb; Dioscorides says that it is fruitful, Nicander and Pliny call it barren; Virgil calls it small, and Theophrastus says that it is large.] and Achaia, the wild brya, [Fée thinks that it is the Tamarix orientalis of Delille.] remarkable for the circumstance that it is only the cultivated kind that bears a fruit, not unlike the gall-nut. In Syria and Egypt this plant is very abundant. It is to the trees of this last country that we give the name of “unhappy;” [“Infelix,” meaning “sterile.” He seems to say this more particularly in reference to the brya, which Egypt produces. As to this use of the word “infelix,” see B. xvi. c..] but yet those of Greece are more unhappy still, for that country produces the tree known as “ostrys,” or, as it is sometimes called, “ostrya,” [Sprengel and Fée identify this with the Ostrya vulgaris of Willdenow, the Carpinus ostrya of Linnæus.] a solitary tree that grows about rocks washed by the water, and very similar in the bark and branches to the ash. It resembles the pear-tree in its leaves, which, however, are a little longer and thicker, with wrinkled indentations running down the whole length of the leaf. The seed of this tree resembles barley in form and colour. The wood is hard and solid; it is said, that if it is introduced into a house, it is productive of painful deliveries and of shocking deaths.

### Chap. 38. (22.)—The Euonymos.

There is no tree productive of a more auspicious presage than one which grows in the Isle of Lesbos, and is known by the name of euonymos. [Or the “luckily named.” It grew on Mount Ordymnus in Lesbos. See Theophrastus, B. ii. c. 31.] It bears some resemblance to the pomegranate tree, the leaf being in size between the leaf of that and the leaf of the laurel, while in shape and softness it resembles that of the pomegranate tree: it has a white blossom, [The Evonymus Europæus, or else the Evonymus latifolius of botanists, is probably intended to be indicated; but it is a mistake to say that it is poisonous to animals. On the contrary, Fée says that sheep will fatten on its leaves very speedily.] by which it immediately gives us notice of its dangerous properties. [“Statim pestem denuntians.” Pliny appears to be in error here. In copying from Theophrastus, he seems to have found the word φόνος used, really in reference to a blood-red juice which distils from the plant; but as the same word also means slaughter, or death, he seems to have thought that it really bears reference to the noxious qualities of the plant.] It bears a pod [Fée censures the use of the word “siliqua,” as inappropriate, although the seed does resemble that of sesamum, the Sesamum orientale of Linnæus.] very similar to that of sesame, within which there is a grain of quadrangular shape, of coarse make and poisonous to animals. The leaf, too, has the same noxious effects; sometimes, however, a speedy alvine discharge is found to give relief on such occasions.

### Chap. 39.—The Tree Called Eon.

Alexander Cornelius has called a tree by the name of “eon,” [Or eonis. Fée suggests that in this story, which probably belongs to the region of Fable, some kind of oak may possibly be alluded to.] with the wood of which, he says, the ship Argo was built. This tree has on it a mistletoe similar to that of the oak, which is proof against all injury from either fire or water, in the same manner, in fact, as that of no other tree known. This tree, however, appears to have been known to no other author, that I am aware of.

### Chap. 40.—The Andrachle.

Nearly all the Greek writers interpret the name of the tree called “andrachle,” as meaning the same as “purslain:” [“Porcillaca.” The Portulaca oleracea of Linnæus.] whereas purslain is, in reality, a herb, and, with the difference of a single letter, is called “andrachne.” The andrachle is a wild tree, which never grows in the plain country, and is similar to the arbute tree in appearance, only that its leaves are smaller, and never fall off. The bark, too, is not rough, but might be taken to be frozen all over, so truly wretched is its appearance.

### Chap. 41.—The Coccygia; the Apharce.

Similar, too, in leaf to the preceding tree, is the coccygia, [The Rhus cotinus of Linnæus, a sort of sumach.] though not so large; it has this peculiarity, that it loses its fruit while still in the downy [This is not the fact; the seeds when ripe are merely lost to view in the large tufts of down which grow on the stems.] state—they then call it “pappus”—a thing that happens to no other tree. The apharce [Generally supposed to be the same as the alaternus, mentioned in B. xvi. c.. Some writers identify it with the Phyllirea angustifolia of Linnæus.] is another tree that is similar to the andrachle, and like it, bears twice in the year: just as the grape is beginning to flower the first fruit is ripening, while the second fruit ripens at the commencement of winter; of what nature this fruit is we do not find stated.

### Chap. 42.—The Ferula.

We ought to place the ferula [Probably the Ferula communis of Linnæus, the herb or shrub known as “fennel giant.”] also in the number of the exotics, and as making one of the trees. For, in fact, we distinguish the trees into several different kinds: it is the nature of some to have wood entirely in place of bark, or, in other words, on the outside; while, in the interior, in place of wood, there is a fungous kind of pith, like that of the elder; others, again, are hollow within, like the reed. The ferula grows in hot countries and in places beyond sea, the stalk being divided into knotted joints. There are two kinds of it; that which grows upwards to a great height the Greeks call by the name of “narthex,” [The Ferula glauca of Linnæus.] while the other, which never rises far from the ground, is known as the “narthecya.” [The Ferula nodiflora of Linnæus.] From the joints very large leaves shoot forth, the largest lying nearest to the ground: in other respects it has the same nature as the anise, which it resembles also in its fruit. The wood of no shrub is lighter than this; hence it is very easily carried, and the stalks of it make good walking-sticks [It is still used for that purpose in the south of Europe. The Roman schoolmasters, as we learn from Juvenal, Martial, and others, employed it for the chastisement of their scholars. Pliny is in error in reckoning it among the trees, it really having no pretensions to be considered such. It is said to have received its name from “ferio,” to “beat.”] for the aged.

### Chap. 43.—The Thapsia.

The seed of the ferula has been by some persons called “thapsia;” [Sprengel thinks that this is the Thapsia asclepium of the moderns; but Fée takes it to be the Thapsia villosa of Linnæus.] deceived, no doubt, by what is really the fact, that the thapsia is a ferula, but of a peculiar kind, with leaves like those of fennel, and a hollow stalk not exceeding a walking-stick in length; the seed is like that of the ferula, and the root of the plant is white. When an incision is made in the thapsia, a milky juice oozes from it, and, when pounded, it produces a kind of juice; the bark even is never thrown [It was valued, Dioscorides says, for its cathartic properties.] away. All these parts of the shrub are poisonous, and, indeed, it is productive of injurious effects to those engaged in digging it up; for if the slightest wind should happen to be blowing towards them from the shrub, the body begins to swell, and erysipelas attacks the face: it is for this reason that, before beginning work, they anoint the face all over with a solution of wax. Still, however, the medical men say that, mixed with other ingredients, it is of considerable use in the treatment of some diseases. It is employed also for the cure of scald-head, and for the removal of black and blue spots upon the skin, as if, indeed, we were really at a loss for remedies in such cases, without having recourse to things of so deadly a nature. These plants, however, act their part in serving as a pretext for the introduction of noxious agents; and so great is the effrontery now displayed, that people would absolutely persuade one that poisons are a requisite adjunct to the practice of the medical art.

The thapsia of Africa [Either the Thapsia garganica of Willdenow, or the Thapsia villosa, found in Africa and the south of Europe, though, as Pliny says, the thapsia of Europe is mild in its effects compared with that of Africa. It is common on the coast of Barbary.] is the most powerful of all. Some persons make an incision in the stalk at harvest-time, and bore holes in the root, too, to let the juice flow; after it has become quite dry, they take it away. Others, again, pound the leaves, stalk, and root in a mortar, and after drying the juice in the sun, divide it into lozenges. [Pastillos.] Nero Cæsar, at the beginning of his reign, conferred considerable celebrity on this plant. In his nocturnal skirmishes [Nocturnis grassationibus.] it so happened that he received several contusions on the face, upon which he anointed it with a mixture composed of thapsia, frankincense, and wax, and so contrived the next day effectually to give the lie to all rumours, by appearing with a whole skin. [It is still used in Barbary for the cure of tetter and ringworm.] It is a well-known fact, that fire [The story was, that Prometheus, when he stole the heavenly fire from Jupiter, concealed it in a stalk of narthex.] is kept alight remarkably well in the hollow stalk of the ferula, and that for this purpose those of Egypt are the best.

### Chap. 44. (23.)—The Capparis or Cynosbaton, Otherwise Ophiostaphyle.

In Egypt, too, the capparis [The “caper-tree,” the Capparis spinosa of Linnæus. Fée suggests that Pliny may possibly allude, in some of the features which he describes, to kinds less known; such, for instance, as the Capparis inermis of Forskhal, found in Arabia; the Capparis ovata of Desfontaines, found in Barbary; the Capparis Sinaica, found on Mount Sinai, and remarkable for the size of its fruit; and the Capparis Ægyptiaca of Lamarck, commonly found in Egypt.] is found, a shrub with a wood of much greater solidity. The seed of it is a well-known article of food, [The stalk and seed were salted or pickled. The buds or unexpanded flowers of this shrub are admired as a pickle or sauce of delicate flavour.] and is mostly gathered together with the stalk. It is as well, however, to be on our guard against the foreign kinds; [Fée remarks that this is not the truth, all the kinds possessing the same qualities. There may, however, have been some difference in the mode of salting or pickling them, and possibly productive of noxious effects.] for that of Arabia has certain deleterious properties, that from Africa is injurious to the gums, and that from Marmarica is prejudicial to the womb and causes flatulence in all the organs. That of Apulia, too, is productive of vomiting, and causes derangement in the stomach and intestines. Some persons call this shrub “cynosbaton,” [Probably from its thorns, that being the name of the sweet-briar, or dog-rose.] others, again, “ophiostaphyle.” [“Serpent grapes.”]

### Chap. 45.—The Saripha.

The saripha, [Sprengel and Fée take this to be the Cyperus fastigiatus of Linnæus, which Forskhal found in the river Nile.] too, that grows on the banks of the Nile, is one of the shrub genus. It is generally about two cubits in height, and of the thickness of one’s thumb: it has the foliage of the papyrus, and is eaten in a similar manner. The root, in consequence of its extreme hardness, is used as a substitute for charcoal in forging iron.

### Chap. 46. (24.)—The Royal Thorn.

We must take care, also, not to omit a peculiar shrub that is planted at Babylon, and only upon a thorny plant there, as it will not live anywhere else, just in the same manner as the mistletoe will live nowhere but upon trees. This shrub, however, will only grow upon a kind of thorn, which is known as the royal thorn. [Spina regia. Some writers have considered this to be the same with the Centaurea solstitialis of Linnæus. Sprengel takes it to be the Cassyta filiformis of Linnæus, a parasitical plant of India. We must conclude, however, with Fée, that both the thorn and the parasite have not hitherto been identified.] It is a wonderful fact, but it germinates the very same day that it has been planted. This is done at the rising of the Dog-star, after which it speedily takes possession of the whole tree. They use it in the preparation of wine, and it is for this purpose that it is planted. This thorn grows at Athens also, upon the Long Walls there. [The Makron Teichos. See B. iv. c. 11.]

### Chap. 47.—The Cytisus.

The cytisus [From the various statements of ancient authors, Fée has come to the conclusion that this name was given to two totally different productions. The cytisus which the poets speak of as grateful to bees and goats, and sheep, he takes to be the Medicago arborea of Linnæus, known to us as Medic trefoil, or lucerne; while the other, a tree with a black wood, he considers identical with the Cytisus laburnum of Linnæus, the laburnum, or false ebony tree.] is also a shrub, which, as a food for sheep, has been extolled with wonderful encomiums by Aristomachus the Athenian, and, in a dry state, for swine as well: the same author, too, pledges his word that a jugerum of very middling land, planted with the cytisus, will produce an income of two thousand sesterces per annum. It is quite as useful as the ervum, [A kind of vetch or tare. See B. xviii.] but is apt to satiate more speedily: very little of it is necessary to fatten cattle; to such a degree, indeed, that beasts of burden, when fed upon it, will very soon take a dislike to barley. There is no fodder known, in fact, that is productive of a greater abundance of milk, and of better quality; in the medical treatment of cattle in particular, this shrub is found a most excellent specific for every kind of malady. Even more than this, the same author recommends it, when first dried and then boiled in water, to be given to nursing women, mixed with wine, in cases where the milk has failed them: and he says that, if this is done, the infant will be all the stronger and taller for it. In a green state, or, if dried, steeped in water, he recommends it for fowls. Both Democritus and Aristomachus promise us also that bees will never fail us so long as they can obtain the cytisus for food. There is no crop that we know of, of a similar nature, that costs a smaller price. It is sown at the same time as barley, or, at all events, in the spring, in seed like the leek, or else planted in the autumn, and before the winter solstice, in the stalk. When sown in grain, it ought to be steeped in water, and if there should happen to be no rain, it ought to be watered when sown: when the plants are about a cubit in height, they are replanted in trenches a foot in depth. It is transplanted at the equinoxes, while the shrub is yet tender, and in three years it will arrive at maturity. It is cut at the vernal equinox, when the flower is just going off; a child or an old woman is able to do this, and their labour may be had at a trifling rate. It is of a white appearance, and if one would wish to express briefly what it looks like, it is a trifoliated shrub, [“Frutex.” When speaking of it as a shrub, he seems to be confounding the tree with the plant.] with small, narrow leaves. It is always given to animals at intervals of a couple of days, and in winter, when it is dry, before being given to them, it is first moistened with water. Ten pounds of cytisus will suffice for a horse, and for smaller animals in proportion: if I may here mention it by the way, it is found very profitable to sow garlic and onions between the rows of cytisus.

This shrub has been found in the Isle of Cythnus, from whence it has been transplanted to all the Cyclades, and more recently to the cities of Greece, a fact which has greatly increased the supply of cheese: considering which, I am much surprised that it is so rarely used in Italy. This shrub is proof, too, against all injuries from heat, from cold, from hail, and from snow: and, as Hyginus adds, against the depredations of the enemy even, the wood [Evidently in allusion to the tree.] produced being of no value whatever.

### Chap. 48. (25.)—The Trees and Shrubs of the Mediterranean. The Phycos, Prason, or Zoster.

Shrubs and trees grow in the sea [He alludes to various kinds of fucus or sea-weed, which grows to a much larger size in the Eastern seas.] as well; those of our sea [The Mediterranean.] are of inferior size, while, on the other hand, the Red Sea and all the Eastern Ocean are filled with dense forests. No other language has any name for the shrub which is known to the Greeks as the “phycos,” [Whence the word “fucus” of the naturalists.] since by the word “alga” [Fée suggests that this may be the Laminaria saccharina of Linnæus, being one of the “ulvæ” often thrown up on the coasts of Europe.] a mere herb is generally understood, while the “phycos” is a complete shrub. This plant has a broad leaf of a green colour, which is by some called “prason,” [The “green” plant.] and by others is known as “zoster.” [The “girdle” plant.] Another kind, [The Fucus barbatus, probably, of Linnæus, or else the Fucus eroïdes.] again, has a hairy sort of leaf, very similar to fennel, and grows upon rocks, while that previously mentioned grows in shoaly spots, not far from the shore. Both kinds shoot in the spring, and die in autumn. [They are in reality more long-lived than this.] The phycos [Fée suggests that it is the Roccella tinctoria of Linnæus.] which grows on the rocks in the neighbourhood of Crete, is used also for dyeing purple; the best kind being that produced on the north side of the island, which is the case also with sponges of the very best quality. A third kind, [The Zostera marina of Linnæus, according to Fée.] again, is similar in appearance to grass; the root of it is knotted, and so is the stalk, which resembles that of a reed.

### Chap. 49.—The Sea Bryon.

There is another kind of marine shrub, known by the name of “bryon;” [The Ulva lactuca of the moderns, a very common sea-weed.] it has the leaf of the lettuce, only that it is of a more wrinkled appearance; it grows nearer land, too, than the last. Far out at sea we find a fir-tree [The Fucus ericoïdes, Fée suggests, not unlike a fir in appearance.] and an oak, [Quercus. According to Gmellin, this is the Fucus vesiculosus of Linnæus. Its leaves are indented, somewhat similarly to those of the oak.] each a cubit in height; shells are found adhering to their branches. It is said that this sea-oak is used for dyeing wool, and that some of them even bear acorns [Polybius, as quoted by Athenæus, says that in the Lusitanian Sea there are oaks that bear acorns, on which the thunnies feed and grow fat.] in the sea, a fact which has been ascertained by shipwrecked persons and divers. There are other marine trees also of remarkable size, found in the vicinity of Sicyon; the sea-vine, [On the contrary, Theophrastus says, B. iv. c. 7, that the sea-vine grows near the sea, from which Fée is disposed to consider it a phanerogamous plant. If, on the other hand, it is really a fucus, he thinks that the Fucus uvarius may be meant, the vesicles of which resemble a grape in shape.] indeed, grows everywhere. The sea-fig [He speaks of a madrepore, Fée thinks, the identity of which it is difficult to determine. Professor Pallas speaks of an Alcyonidium ficus, which lives in the Mediterranean and in the ocean, and which resembles a fig, and has no leaves, but its exterior is not red.] is destitute of leaves, and the bark is red. There is a palm-tree [Fée queries whether this may not be the Gorgonia palma of Linnæus, which has received its name from its resemblance to a small palm-tree.] also in the number of the sea-shrubs. Beyond the columns of Hercules there is a sea-shrub that grows with the leaf of the leek, and others with those of the carrot, [These three, Fée thinks, are madrepores or zoophytes, which it would be vain to attempt to identify.] and of thyme. Both of these last, when thrown up by the tide, are transformed [That is, they dry up to the consistency of pumice.] into pumice.

### Chap. 50.—Plants of the Red Sea.

In the East, it is a very remarkable thing, that immediately after leaving Coptos, as we pass through the deserts, we find nothing whatever growing, with the exception of the thorn that is known as the “thirsty” [“Sitiens.” Delille considers this as identical with his Acacia seyal, a thorny tree, often to be seen in the deserts of Africa.] thorn; and this but very rarely. In the Red Sea, however, there are whole forests found growing, among which more particularly there are plants that bear the laurel-berry and the olive; [Probably zoophytes now unknown.] when it rains also certain fungi make their appearance, which, as soon as they are touched by the rays of the sun, are turned into pumice. [Fée suggests that he may allude to the Madrepora fungites of Linnæus, the Fungus lapideus of Bauhin. These are found in the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean; but, of course, the story of their appearance during rain is fabulous.] The size of the shrubs is three cubits in height; and they are all filled with sea-dogs, [Sharks; see B. ix. c. 70.] to such a degree, that it is hardly safe to look at them from the ship, for they will frequently seize hold of the very oars.

### Chap. 51.—Plants of the Indian Sea.

The officers [The companions of Onesicritus and Nearchus.] of Alexander who navigated the Indian seas, have left an account of a marine tree, the foliage of which is green while in the water; but the moment it is taken out, it dries and turns to salt. They have spoken also of bulrushes [Fée hazards a conjecture that this may be the Gorgonia scirpea of Pallas, found in the Indian Seas.] of stone bearing a strong resemblance to real ones, which grew along the sea-shore, as also certain shrubs [One of the Gorgoniæ, Fée thinks; but its characteristics are not sufficiently stated to enable us to identify it.] in the main sea, the colour of an ox’s horn, branching out in various directions, and red at the tips. These, they say, were brittle, and broke like glass when touched, while, on the other hand, in the fire they would become red-hot like iron, and when cool resume their original colour.

In the same part of the earth also, the tide covers the forests that grow on the islands, although the trees there are more lofty [A fable worthy of Sinbad the Sailor!] than the very tallest of our planes and poplars! The leaves of these trees resemble that of the laurel, while the blossom is similar to the violet, both in smell and colour: the berries resemble those of the olive, and they, too, have an agreeable smell: they appear in the autumn, and the leaves of the trees never fall off. The smaller ones are entirely covered by the waves, while the summits of those of larger size protrude from the water, and ships are made fast to them; when the tide falls the vessels are similarly moored to the roots. We find the same persons making mention of certain other trees which they saw out at sea, which always retained their leaves, and bore a fruit very similar to the lupine.

### Chap. 52.—The Plants of the Troglodytic Sea; the Hair of Isis: The Charito-blepharon.

Juba relates, that about the islands of the Troglodytæ there is a certain shrub found out at sea, which is known as the “hair of Isis:” [“Isidis crinem.” Fée says that this is evidently black coral, the Gorgonia antipathes of Linnæus.] he says that it bears a strong resemblance to coral, is destitute of leaves, and if cut will change its colour, becoming quite black and hard, and so brittle as to break if it falls. He speaks also of another marine plant, to which he gives the name of “Charito-blepharon,” [“The eyelid of the Graces.” Fée is almost tempted to think that he means red coral.] and which, he says, is particularly efficacious in love-charms. [Amatoriis.] Bracelets [Spatalia. Armlets or bracelets.] and necklaces are made of it. He says also that it is sensible [By this apparently fabulous story, one would be almost inclined to think that he is speaking of a zoophyte.] when it is about to be taken, and that it turns as hard as horn, so hard, indeed, as to blunt the edge of iron. If, on the other hand, it is cut before it is sensible of the danger, it is immediately transformed to stone.

Summary. —Remarkable facts, narratives, and observations, four hundred and sixty-eight.

Roman authors quoted. —M. Varro, [See end of B. ii.] Mucianus, [See end of B. ii.] Virgil, [See end of B vii.] Fabianus, [Papirius Fabianus. See end of B. ii.] Sebosus, [See end of B. ii.] Pomponius Mela, [See end of B. iii.] Fabius, [Fabius Pictor. See end of B. x.] Procilius, [See end of B. viii.] Hyginus, [See end of B. iii.] Trogus, [Trogus Pompeius. See end of B. vii.] Claudius Cæsar, [See end of B. v.] Cornelius Nepos, [See end of B. ii.] Sextius Niger [See end of B..] who wrote in Greek on Medicine, Cassius Hemina, [See end of B..] L. Piso, [See end of B. ii.] Tuditanus, [See end of B..] Antias. [See end of B. ii.]

Foreign authors quoted. —Theophrastus, [See end of B. iii.] Herodotus, [See end of B. ii.] Callisthenes, [See end of B..] Isigonus, [See end of B. vii.] Clitarchus, [See end of B. vi.] Anaximenes, [See end of B..] Duris, [See end of B. vii.] Nearchus, [See end of B. vi.] Onesicritus, [See end of B. ii.] Polycritus, [See end of B..] Olympiodorus, [See end of B..] Diognetus, [See end of B. vi.] Cleobulus, [See end of B. iv.] Anticlides, [See end of B. iv.] Chares [See end of B..] of Mitylene, Menæchmus, [See end of B. iv.] Dorotheus [See end of B. viii.] of Athens, Lycus, [See end of B..] Antæus, [See end of B..] Ephippus, [See end of B..] Dion, [See end of B. viii.] Adimantus, [Nothing certain is known of him; but he appears to be the geographer, a native of Lampsacus, mentioned by Strabo in B. xiii.] Ptolemy Lagus, [See end of B..] Marsyas [See end of B..] of Macedon, Zoilus [See end of B..] of Macedon, Democritus, [See end of B. ii.] Amphilochus, [See end of B. viii.] Alexander Polyhistor, [See end of B. iii.] Aristomachus, [A writer on Agriculture, or domestic economy; but nothing further is known of him.] King Juba, [See end of B. v.] Apollodorus [Perhaps the same writer that is mentioned at the end of B..] who wrote on Perfumes, Heraclides [For two physicians of this name, see end of B..] the physician, Botrys [One of his prescriptions is preserved in the works of Galen. Nothing else is known of him.] the physician, Archidemus [See end of B..] the physician, Dionysius [See end of B..] the physician, Democlides [See end of B..] the physician, Euphron [See end of B..] the physician, Mnesides [See end of B..] the physician, Diagoras [See end of B..] the physician, Iollas [See end of B..] the physician, Heraclides [See end of B..] of Tarentum, Xenocrates [See end of B..] of Ephesus.
