---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 29-33."
chapter_order: 32
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 29. (15.)—Ninety-Six Islands of the Gallic Ocean.

In the Rhine itself, nearly 100 miles in length, is the most famous island [This island appears to have been formed by the bifurcation of the Rhine, the northern branch of which enters the sea at Katwyck, a few miles north of Leyden, by the Waal and the course of the Maas, after it has received the Waal, and by the sea. The Waal or Vahalis seems to have undergone considerable changes, and the place of its junction with the Maas may have varied. Pliny makes the island nearly 100 miles in length, which is about the distance from the fort of Schenkenschanz, where the first separation of the Rhine takes place, to the mouth of the Maas. The name of Batavia was no doubt the genuine name, which is still preserved in Betuwe, the name of a district at the bifurcation of the Rhine and the Waal. The Canninefates, a people of the same race as the Batavi, also occupied the island, and as the Batavi seem to have been in the eastern part, it is supposed that the Canninefates occupied the western. They were subdued by Tiberius in the reign of Augustus.] of the Batavi and the Canninefates, as also other islands of the Frisii [The Frisii or Frisones were one of the great tribes of north-western Germany, properly belonging to the group of the Ingævones. They inhabited the country about Lake Flevo and other lakes, between the Rhine and the Ems, so as to be bounded on the south by the Bructeri, and on the east by the Chauci. Tacitus distinguishes between the Frisii Majores and Minores, and it is supposed that the latter dwelt on the east of the canal of Drusus in the north of Holland, and the former between the rivers Flevus and Amisia, that is, in the country which still bears the name of Friesland. The Chauci have been previously mentioned.], the Chauci, the Frisiabones [The Frisiabones or Frisævones are again mentioned in C. of the present Book as a people of Gaul. In what locality they dwelt has not been ascertained by historians.], the Sturii [The Sturii are supposed to have inhabited the modern South Holland, while the Marsacii probably inhabited the island which the Meuse forms at its junction with the Rhine, at the modern Dortrecht in Zealand.], and the Marsacii, which lie between Helium [Supposed to be the site of the modern fortress of Briel, situate at the mouth of the Meuse.] and Flevum [Probably the same as the modern Vlieland (thus partly retaining its ancient name), an island north of the Texel. The more ancient writers speak of two main arms, into which the Rhine was divided on entering the territory of the Batavi, of which the one on the east continued to bear the name of Rhenus, while that on the west into which the Masa, Maas or Meuse, flowed, was called Vahalis or Waal. After Drusus, B.C. 12, had connected the Flevo Lacus or Zuyder-Zee with the Rhine by means of a canal, in forming which he probably made use of the bed of the Yssel, we find mention made of three mouths of the Rhine. Of these the names, as given by Pliny, are, on the west, Helium (the Vahalis of other writers), in the centre Rhenus, and at the north Flevum; but at a later period we again find mention made of only two mouths.]. These are the names of the mouths into which the Rhine divides itself, discharging its waters on the north into the lakes there, and on the west into the river Mosa. At the middle mouth which lies between these two, the river, having but a very small channel, preserves its own name.

### Chap. 30. (16.)—Britannia.

Opposite to this coast is the island called Britannia, so celebrated in the records of Greece [Britain was spoken of by some of the Greek writers as superior to all other islands in the world. Dionysius, in his Periegesis, says, “that no other islands whatsoever can claim equality with those of Britain.”] and of our own country. It is situate to the north-west, and, with a large tract of intervening sea, lies opposite to Germany, Gaul, and Spain, by far the greater part of Europe. Its former name was Albion [Said to have been so called from the whiteness of its cliffs opposite the coast of Gaul.]; but at a later period, all the islands, of which we shall just now briefly make mention, were included under the name of “Britanniæ.” This island is distant from Gesoriacum, on the coast of the nation of the Morini [Afterwards called Bononia, the modern Boulogne. As D’Anville remarks, the distance here given by Pliny is far too great, whether we measure to Dover or to Hythe; our author’s measurement however is probably made to Rutupiæ (the modern Richborough), near Sandwich, where the Romans had a fortified post, which was their landing-place when crossing over from Gaul. This would make the distance given by Pliny nearer the truth, though still too much.], at the spot where the passage across is the shortest, fifty miles. Pytheas and Isidorus say that its circumference is 4875 miles. It is barely thirty years since any extensive knowledge of it was gained by the successes of the Roman arms, and even as yet they have not penetrated beyond the vicinity of the Caledonian [Probably the Grampian range is here referred to.] forest. Agrippa believes its length to be 800 miles, and its breadth 300; he also thinks that the breadth of Hibernia is the same, but that its length is less by 200 miles. This last island is situate beyond Britannia, the passage across being the shortest from the territory of the Silures [The people of South Wales.], a distance of thirty miles. Of the remaining islands none is said to have a greater circumference than 125 miles. Among these there are the Orcades [The Orkney islands were included under this name. Pomponius Mela and Ptolemy make them but thirty in number, while Solinus fixes their number at three only.], forty in number, and situate within a short distance of each other, the seven islands called Acmodæ [Also called Æmodæ or Hæmodæ, most probably the islands now known as the Shetlands. Camden however and the older antiquarians refer the Hæmodæ to the Baltic sea, considering them different from the Acmodæ here mentioned, while Salmasius on the other hand considers the Acmodæ or Hæmodæ and the Hebrides as identical. Parisot remarks that off the West Cape of the Isle of Skye and the Isle of North Uist, the nearest of the Hebrides to the Shetland islands, there is a vast gulf filled with islands, which still bears the name of Mamaddy or Maddy, from which the Greeks may have easily derived the words Αἱ Μαδδαὶ, whence the Latin Hæmodæ.], the Hæbudes, thirty in number, and, between Hibernia and Britannia, the islands of Mona [The Isle of Anglesea.], Monapia [Most probably the Isle of Man.], Ricina [Camden and Gosselin (Rech. sur la Géogr. des Anciens) consider that under this name is meant the island of Racklin, situate near the north-eastern extremity of Ireland. A Ricina is spoken of by Ptolemy, but that island is one of the Hebrides.], Vectis [This Vectis is considered by Gosselin to be the same as the small island of White-Horn, situate at the entrance of the Bay of Wigtown in Scotland. It must not be confounded with the more southern Vectis, or Isle of Wight.], Limnus [According to Gosselin this is the island of Dalkey, at the entrance of Dublin Bay.], and Andros [Camden thinks that this is the same as Bardsey Island, at the south of the island of Anglesea, while Mannert and Gosselin think that it is the island of Lambay.]. Below it are the islands called Samnis and Axantos [According to Brotier these islands belong to the coast of Britanny, being the modern isles of Sian and Ushant.], and opposite, scattered in the German Sea, are those known as the Glæsariæ [As already mentioned, he probably speaks of the islands of Œland and Gothland, and Ameland, called Austeravia or Actania, in which glæsum or amber was found by the Roman soldiers. See p. 344.], but which the Greeks have more recently called the Electrides, from the circumstance of their producing electrum or amber. The most remote of all that we find mentioned is Thule [The opinions as to the identity of ancient Thule have been numerous in the extreme. We may here mention six:—1. The common, and apparently the best founded opinion, that Thule is the island of Iceland. 2. That it is either the Ferroe group, or one of those islands. 3. The notion of Ortelius, Farnaby, and Schœnning, that it is identical with Thylemark in Norway. 4. The opinion of Malte Brun, that the continental portion of Denmark is meant thereby, a part of which is to the present day called Thy or Thyland. 5. The opinion of Rudbeck and of Calstron, borrowed originally from Procopius, that this is a general name for the whole of Scandinavia. 6. That of Gosselin, who thinks that under this name Mainland, the principal of the Shetland Islands, is meant. It is by no means impossible that under the name of Thule two or more of these localities may have been meant, by different authors writing at distant periods and under different states of geographical knowledge. It is also pretty generally acknowledged, as Parisot remarks, that the Thule mentioned by Ptolemy is identical with Thylemark in Norway.], in which, as we have previously stated [B. ii. c..], there is no night at the summer solstice, when the sun is passing through the sign of Cancer, while on the other hand at the winter solstice there is no day. Some writers are of opinion that this state of things lasts for six whole months together. Timæus the historian says that an island called Mictis [Brotier thinks that under this name a part of Cornwall is meant, and that it was erroneously supposed to be an island. Parisot is of opinion that the copyists, or more probably Pliny himself, has made an error in transcribing Mictis for Vectis, the name of the Isle of Wight. It is not improbable however that the island of Mictis had only an imaginary existence.] is within six days’ sail of Britannia, in which white lead [“White lead”: not, however, the metallic substance which we understand by that name, but tin.] is found; and that the Britons sail over to it in boats of osier [Commonly known as “coracles,” and used by the Welch in modern times. See B. vii. c. 57 of this work, and the Note.], covered with sewed hides. There are writers also who make mention of some other islands, Scandia [Brotier, with many other writers, takes these names to refer to various parts of the coast of Norway. Scandia he considers to be the same as Scania, Bergos the modern Bergen, and Nerigos the northern part of Norway. On the other hand, Gosselin is of opinion that under the name of Bergos the Scottish island of Barra is meant, and under that of Nerigos, the island of Lewis, the northern promontory of which is in the old maps designated by the name of Nary or Nery. Ptolemy makes mention of an island called Doumna in the vicinity of the Orcades.] namely, Dumna, Bergos, and, greater than all, Nerigos, from which persons embark for Thule. At one day’s sail from Thule is the frozen ocean, which by some is called the Cronian Sea.

### Chap. 31. (17.)—Gallia Belgica.

The whole of Gaul that is comprehended under the one general name of Comata [Transalpine Gaul, with the exception of that part of it called Narbonensis, was called Gallia Comata, from the custom of the people allowing their hair to grow to a great length.], is divided into three races of people, which are more especially kept distinct from each other by the following rivers. From the Scaldis to the Sequana [From the Scheldt to the Seine.] it is Belgic Gaul; from the Sequana to the Garumna [From the Seine to the Garonne.] it is Celtic Gaul or Lugdunensis [Lyonese Gaul, from Lugdunum, the ancient name of the city of Lyons.]; and from the Garumna to the promontory of the Pyrenæan range it is Aquitanian Gaul, formerly called Aremorica [Said by Camden to be derived from the Celtic words Ar - mor, “by the Sea.”]. Agrippa makes the entire length of the coast of Gaul to be 1800 miles, measured from the Rhine to the Pyrenees: and its length, from the ocean to the mountains of Gebenna and Jura, excluding therefrom Gallia Narbonensis, he computes at 420 miles, the breadth being 318.

Beginning at the Scaldis, the parts beyond [The provinces of Antwerp and North Brabant.] are inhabited by the Toxandri, who are divided into various peoples with many names; after whom come the Menapii [Inhabiting Western Flanders.], the Morini [So called, it is supposed, from the Celtic word Mor, which means “the sea.” Térouane and Boulogne are supposed to occupy the site of their towns, situate in the modern Pas de Calais.], the Oromarsaci [D’Anville places them between Calais and Gravellines, in the Pas de Calais, and on the spot now known as the Terre de Marck or Merk.], who are adjacent to the burgh which is known as Gesoriacum [Boulogne, previously mentioned.], the Britanni [Cluver thinks that “Brianni” would be the correct reading here; but D’Anville places the Britanni on the southern bank of the stream called La Canche in the Pas de Calais.], the Ambiani [According to Parisot and Ansart they occupied the department of the Somme, with places on the site of Amiens (derived from their name) and Abbeville for their chief towns.], the Bellovaci [They dwelt in the modern department of the Oise, with Beauvais (which still retains their name) for their chief town.], the Hassi [D’Anville is of opinion that the place called Haiz or Hez in the diocese of Beauvais, received its name from this people, of whom nothing else is known. The name is omitted in several of the editions.], and, more in the interior, the Catoslugi [D’Anville is of opinion that their chief town was situate at the modern Chaours, at the passage of the river Serre, not far from Vervins in the department of the Aisne.], the Atrebates [According to Ptolemy their chief town would be on the site of the modern Orchies in the department du Nord, but Cæsar makes it to be Nemetacum, the modern Arras, the capital of the department of the Pas de Calais.], the Nervii [According to Ansart their chief town was Bavai, in the department du Nord. They are called “Liberi,” or free, because they were left at liberty to enjoy their own laws and institutions.], a free people, the Veromandui [Their capital was Augusta Veromanduorum, and it has been suggested that the place called Vermand, in the department de l’Aisne, denotes its site; but according to Bellay and D’Anville the city of St. Quentin, which was formerly called Aouste, marks the spot.], the Suæuconi [Nothing whatever is known of them, and it is suggested by the commentators that this is a corrupted form of the name of the Suessiones, which follows.], the Suessiones [They gave name to Soissons in the southern part of the department de l’Aisne.], a free people, the Ulmanetes [It has been suggested that these are the same as the Silvanectes, the inhabitants of Senlis in the department de l’Oise.], a free people, the Tungri [The people of Tongres, in the provinces of Namur, Liège, and Limbourg.], the Sunuci [They are supposed to have dwelt in the eastern part of the province of Limbourg.], the Frisiabones [They probably dwelt between the Sunuci and the Betasi.], the Betasi [They are supposed to have dwelt in the western part of the province of Limbourg, on the confines of that province and South Brabant, in the vicinity probably of the place which still bears the name of Beetz, upon the river Gette, between Leau and Haclen, seven miles to the east of Louvain.], the Leuci [According to Ptolemy the Leuci dwelt on the sites of Toul in the department of the Meurthe, and of Nais or Nays in that of the Meuse.], a free people, the Treveri [From them Trèves or Trier, in the Grand Duchy of the Lower Rhine, takes its name.], who were formerly free, and the Lingones [Their chief town was on the site of Langres, in the department of the Haute Marne.], a federal state, the federal Remi [They gave name to the city of Rheims in the department of the Marne.], the Mediomatrici [Their chief town stood on the site of the modern Metz, in the department of the Moselle.], the Sequani [Besançon stands on the site of their chief town, in the department of the Doubs, extending as far as Bâle.], the Raurici [The inhabitants of the district called the Haut Rhin or Higher Rhine.], and the Helvetii [The inhabitants of the west of Switzerland.]. The Roman colonies are Equestris [Or the “Equestrian Colony,” probably founded by the Roman Equites. It is not known where this colony was situate, but it is suggested by Cluver and Monetus that it may have been on the lake of Geneva, in the vicinity of the modern town of Nyon.] and Rauriaca [Littré, in a note, remarks that Rauriaca is a barbarism, and that the reading properly is “Raurica.”]. The nations of Germany which dwell in this province, near the sources of the Rhine, are the Nemetes [Spire was their chief city, in the province of the Rhine.], the Triboci [They are supposed to have occupied Strasbourg, and the greater part of the department of the Lower Rhine.], and the Vangiones [They dwelt in the modern Grand Duchy of Hesse Darmstadt; Worms was their chief city.]; nearer again [That is, nearer the mouths of the Rhine.], the Ubii [They originally dwelt on the right bank of the Rhine, but were transported across the river by Agrippa in B.C. 37, at their own request, from a wish to escape the attacks of the Suevi.], the Colony [Now known as the city of Cologne. It took its name from Agrippina, the wife of Claudius and the mother of Nero, who was born there, and who, as Tacitus says, to show off her power to the allied nations, planted a colony of veteran soldiers in her native city, and gave to it her own name.] of Agrippina, the Cugerni [Their district was in the modern circle of Clèves, in the province of Juliers-Berg-Clèves.], the Batavi [Dwelling in the Insula Batavorum, mentioned in C. of the present Book.], and the peoples whom we have already mentioned as dwelling on the islands of the Rhine.

### Chap. 32. (18.)—Gallia Lugdunensis.

That part of Gaul which is known as Lugdunensis [He first speaks of the nations on the coast, and then of those more in the interior.] contains the Lexovii [Dwelling in the west of the department of Calvados, and the east of the department of the Eure. From them Lisieux takes its name.], the Vellocasses [They occupied the department of the Lower Seine.], the Galeti [They are supposed to have dwelt in the vicinity of Lillebonne, in the department of the Lower Seine.], the Veneti [They gave name to the town of Vannes in the department of Morbihan.], the Abrincatui [From them the city of Avranches, in the department of La Manche, derives its name.], the Ossismi [They occupied the modern department of Finisterre.], and the celebrated river Ligeris [The Loire.], as also a most remarkable peninsula, which extends into the ocean at the extremity [This spot is placed by D’Anville near the modern city of Saint Brieuc. He refers here to the peninsula of Brittany, which ends in Finisterre.] of the territory of the Ossismi, the circumference of which is 625 [Ansart remarks that the circuit of the peninsula from Saint Brieuc to the mouth of the river Vilaine is only 450 miles, but that if taken from the city of Avranches to the mouth of the Loire, it is 650.] miles, and its breadth at the neck 125 [Ansart states that from Avranches to the mouth of the Loire, in a straight line, is twenty miles less than the distance here given by Pliny.]. Beyond this are the Nannetes [Inhabitants of the department of the Lower Loire or Loire Inférieure.], and in the interior are the Ædui [This extensive people inhabited the present departments of the Saone et Loire, Allier, Nievre, Rhone nord, and Loire nord. Autun and Chalons-sur-Marne stand on the site of their ancient towns.], a federal people, the Carnuti [They inhabited the departments of the Eure et Loire, and portions of those of the Seine et Oise, of the Loire et Cher, and of the Loiret. Chartres occupies the site of their town.], a federal people, the Boii [They occupied a part of the department of the Allier. Moulins stands on the site of their chief town.], the Senones [Sens, in the department of the Yonne, stands on the site of their chief town.], the Aulerci, both those surnamed Eburovices [The chief town of the Aulerci Eburovices was on the site of the present Passy-sur-Eure, called by the inhabitants Old Evreux, in the department of the Eure.] and those called Cenomanni [They dwelt in the vicinity of the city of Le Mans, in the department of the Sarthe.], the Meldi [Meaux, in the department of the Seine et Marne, denotes the site of their principal town.], a free people, the Parisii [Paris, anciently Lutetia, denotes their locality.], the Tricasses [The city of Troyes, in the department of the Aube, denotes their locality.], the Andecavi [Their chief town stood on the site of Angers, in the department of the Maine et Loire.], the Viducasses [D’Anville says that their chief town stood on the spot now known as Vieux, two leagues from Caen, in the department of Calvados.], the Bodiocasses [The reading here is not improbably “Vadicasses.” If so, they were a people situate at a great distance from the other tribes here mentioned by Pliny. They dwelt in the department De l’Oise, in the district formerly known as Valois, their chief town or city occupying the site of Vez, not far from Villers Cotterets.], the Venelli [D’Anville assigns to the Venelli, or Unelli, as some readings have it, the former district of Cotantin, now called the department of La Manche.], the Cariosvelites [According to D’Anville, Corseuil, two leagues from Dinan, in the department of the Côtes du Nord, denotes the site of their chief town. Hardouin takes Quimper to mark the locality.], the Diablinti [They are supposed by Ansart to have occupied that part of the department of La Mayenne where we find the village of Jublains, two leagues from the city of Mayenne.], the Rhedones [D’Anville assigns to them the greater part of the department of the Ile et Vilaine, and is of opinion that the city of Rennes occupies the site of Condate, their chief town.], the Turones [Tours, in the department of the Indre et Loire, marks the site of their chief town.], the Atesui [They are supposed to have occupied a portion of the department of the Loire.], and the Secusiani [They probably occupied a part of the department of the Loire, as also of that of the Rhone. Their town, Forum Secusianorum, stood on the site of the present Feurs, in the department of the Loire.], a free people, in whose territory is the colony of Lugdunum [The city of Lyons occupies the site of ancient Lugdunum. It is suggested by Hardouin, that the name Lugdunum is a corruption of “Lucudunum,” a compound of the Latin word lucus, “a grove,” and the Celtic dun, “a hill” or “mountain.”].

### Chap. 33. (19.)—Gallia Aquitanica.

In Aquitanica are the Ambilatri [They are mentioned by Cæsar (B. C. iii. 9), in conjunction with the Nannetes, Morini, and others, but nothing can be inferred as to the precise position they occupied.], the Anagnutes [Their locality also is unknown, but it is supposed that they dwelt in the vicinity of the department of La Vendée.], the Pictones [From them ancient Poitou received its name. They are supposed to have occupied the department of the Haute-Vienne, and portions of the departments of La Vendée, the Loire Inférieure, the Maine et Loire, the Deux-Sèvres, and La Vienne.], the Santoni [They gave name to the former Saintonge, now the department of Charente and Charente Inférieure. The town of Saintes occupies the site of their chief town.], a free people, the Bituriges [They occupied the modern department of the Gironde. The city of Bordeaux occupies the site of their chief town.], surnamed Vivisci, the Aquitani [They gave name to Aquitaine, which became corrupted into Guyenne. Pliny is the only author that makes the Aquitani a distinct people of the province of Aquitanica. The Tarusates are supposed to have afterwards occupied the site here referred to by him, with Atures for their chief town, afterwards called Aire, in the department of the Landes.], from whom the province derives its name, the Sediboviates [Their locality is unknown, but it has been suggested that they occupied the departments of the Basses Pyrénées, or Lower Pyrenees.], the Convenæ [So called from the Latin verb convenire, “to assemble” or “meet together.” They are said to have received this name from the circumstance that Ptolemy, after the close of the Sertorian war, finding a pastoral people of predatory habits inhabiting the range of the Pyrenees, ordered them to unite together and form a community in a town or city. From them the present town of Saint Bertrand de Comminges, in the S.W. of the department of the Haute Garonne, derives its Latin name “Lugdunum Convenarum.”], who together form one town, the Begerri [By Cæsar called the Bigerriones. Their name was preserved in that of the district of Bigorre, now the department of the Hautes-Pyrénées. Their chief town was Turba, now Tarbes.], the Tarbelli Quatuorsignani [By calling the Tarbelli Quatuorsignani, he seems to imply that their chief town was a place garrisoned by four maniples of soldiers, each with a signum or standard. Aquæ Tarbellicæ was their chief town, the modern Acqs or Dax, in the S.W. of the department of the Landes.], the Cocosates Sexsignani [Their chief town was probably garrisoned by six signa or maniples. Cocosa, or Coequosa, as it is written in the Antonine Itinerary, is the first place on a road from Aquæ Tarbellicæ or Dax to Burdegala or Bordeaux, now called Marensin. Their locality was in the southern part of the department of the Landes, the inhabitants of which are still divided into two classes, the Bouges, those of the north, or of the Tête de Buch; and the Cousiots, those of the south.], the Venami [Their locality is unknown.], the Onobrisates [D’Anville would read “Onobusates,” and thinks that they dwelt in the district called Nébousan, in the department of the Hautes Pyrénées. He is also of opinion that their town stood on the site of the modern Cioutat, between the rivers Adour and Neste.], the Belendi [They occupied the southern part of the department of the Gironde.], and then the Pyrenæan range. Below these are the Monesi [From them Hardouin suggests that Moneins, in the department of the Basses Pyrénées, takes its name.], the Oscidates [D’Anville is of opinion that they inhabited and gave name to the Vallée d’Ossun, between the Pyrenees and the city of Oléron in the department of the Basses Pyrénées.] a mountain race, the Sibyllates [D’Anville places them in the Vallée de Soule, in the department of the Basses Pyrénées.], the Camponi [From them Campon, a place in the department of the Hautes Pyrénées, is supposed to have received its name.], the Bercorcates [Biscarosse, not far from Tête de Buch in the department of the Landes, is supposed to derive its name from this tribe.], the Pindedunni [Nothing whatever is known of them.], the Lassunni [The more general reading is “Sassumini.” Ansart suggests that the town of Sarrum, between Cognac and Périgueux, in the department of the Dordogne, may have received its name from them.], the Vellates [Ansart suggests that Rieumes, in the department of the Haute Garonne, occupies the site of Ryesium, their chief town, mentioned by Ptolemy.], the Tornates [They are supposed to have given name to Tournay, in the department of the Hautes Pyrénées.], the Consoranni [Supposed to be the same as the Consuarini, mentioned in B. iii. c..], the Ausci [They probably gave name to Auch, in the department of Gers.], the Elusates [Their chief town occupied the site of Euse or Eause, in the department of Gers.], the Sottiates [Their locality is marked by Soz, in the department of the Lot-et-Garonne.], the Oscidates Campestres [Or “Oscidates of the Plains.” They probably gave name to Ossun, two miles from Tarbes, in the department of the Hautes Pyrénées.], the Succasses [From them the village of Cestas, three leagues from Bordeaux, in the department of the Gironde, is supposed to derive its name.], the Tarusates [The village of Tursan, in the department of the Landes, probably derived its name from this tribe.], the Basabocates [Their town was Cossio, afterwards Vasates, now Bazas, in the department of the Gironde.], the Vassei [The site of the Vassei and the Sennates appears to be unknown.], the Sennates, and the Cambolectri Agessinates [D’Anville is of opinion that this tribe gave name to Aisenay or Azenay, a village four leagues distant from Bourbon-Vendée, in the department of La Vendée.]. Joining up to the Pictones are the Bituriges [They occupied the district formerly known as Berry, but now the departments of the Indre, the Cher, and the west of the department of the Allier. Their chief town was Avaricum, now Bourges.], a free people, who are also known as the Cubi, and then the Lemovices [They inhabited the district formerly known as the Limosin, now the departments of the Creuse, the Haute Vienne, and the Corrèze. Their chief town was Augustoritum, afterwards Lemovices, now Limoges.], the Arverni [They occupied the district formerly known as Auvergne, forming the present department of the Allier, and the southern part of the Puy de Dôme and the Cantal. Augustonemetum was their chief town, now Clermont.], a free people, and the Gabales [Situate in the district formerly known as Gevaudan, now the department of La Lozère. Their chief town stood on the site of the present small town of Javoulx, four leagues from Mende.].

Again, adjoining the province of Narbonensis are the Ruteni [They are supposed to have occupied the former district of Rouergue, now known as the department of Aveyron. Their chief town was Segodunum, afterwards Ruteni, now known as Rhodez.], the Cadurci [They occupied the former district of Querci, the present department of Lot and Lot-et-Garonne. Divona, afterwards Cadurci, now Cahors, was their principal town.], the Nitiobriges [According to Ptolemy their town was Aginnum, probably the modern Agen, in the present department of Lot-et-Garonne. “Antobroges,” however, is the more common reading.], and the Petrocori [They occupied the district formerly known as Périgord, in the department of the Dordogne; their town was Vesanna, afterwards Petrocori, now Périgueux.], separated by the river Tarnis from the Tolosani. The seas around the coast are the Northern Ocean, flowing up to the mouth of the Rhine, the Britannic Ocean between the Rhine and the Sequana, and, between it and the Pyrenees, the Gallic Ocean. There are many islands belonging to the Veneti, which bear the name of “Veneticæ [Ansart says they are about 200 in number, consisting of Belle Isle, Groaix, Houat, Hoedic, and others. Also probably Morbihan.],” as also in the Aquitanic Gulf, that of Uliarus [The Isle of Oleron, the fountain-head of the maritime laws of Europe.].
