---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 53-62."
chapter_order: 247
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 53.—Leros.

The stone called “leros” [The reading is doubtful, “zeros” and “erros” being given by some MSS. Ajasson hazards a conjecture that it may have been a variety of quartz, formed of a concretion of agates united by a cement of a similar nature.] is similar in appearance, but does not produce the same effects. It is a crystal, with streaks of white and black running across it.

### Chap. 54.—Achates; the Several Varieties of It. Acopos; the Remedies Derived from It. Alabastritis; the Remedies Derived from It. Alectoria. Androdamas. Argyrodamas. Antipathes. Arabica. Aromatitis. Asbestos. Aspisatis. Atizöe. Augetis. Amphidanes or Chrysocolla. Aphrodisiaca. Apsyctos. Ægyptilla.

Having now described the principal precious stones, classified according to their respective colours, I shall proceed to mention the rest of them in their alphabetical order.

(10.) Achates [A general name for Agate, and possibly some other stones not now included under the name.] was a stone formerly in high esteem, but now held in none. It was first found in Sicily, near a river of that name; but has since been discovered in numerous other localities. In size it exceeds any other stones of this class, and the varieties of it are numerous, the name varying accordingly. Thus, for example, we have iaspachates, [“Jasper agate.”] cerachates, [“Wax agate.” The modern Orange agate, probably.] smaragdachates, [“Smaragdus agate.” Emerald-coloured agate.] hæmachates, [“Blood agate.” Agate sprinkled with spots of red jasper.] leucachates, [“White agate.”] dendrachates, [“Tree agate.” Moss agate or Mocha stone, coloured by oxide of iron.] marked with small shrubs, as it were; autachates, [Probably the reading should be “Stactachates,” “Myrrh agate.”] which when burnt has a smell like that of myrrh; and coralloachates, [“Coralline agate.” See Chapter.] spotted all over, like sapphiros, with drops of gold, and commonly found in Crete, where it is also known as “sacred” achates. This last, it is thought, is good for wounds inflicted by spiders and scorpions; a property which I could really believe to belong to the stones of Sicily, for, the moment they breathe the air of that province, scorpions lose their venom.

The stones, too, that are found in India are possessed of similar properties, and of other great and marvellous properties as well; for they present the appearance in them of rivers, [Undulated agate.] woods, [Moss agate, probably. See Note above.] beasts of burden, and forms even, like ivy [Sillig is of opinion that the reading here is corrupt.] and the trappings of horses. Medical men, too, make grinding-hones [“Coticulas.” Stones for grinding drugs.] of these stones, and indeed the very sight of them is beneficial for the eyes: held in the mouth, they allay thirst. Those found in Phrygia have no green in them, and those of Thebes in Egypt are destitute of red and white veins. These last are good as a counterpoison to the venom of the scorpion, and the stones of Cyprus are held in similar repute. Some persons set the highest value upon those stones which present a transparency like that of glass. They are found also in Trachinia, in the vicinity of Mount Œta, upon Mount Parnassus, in the Isle of Lesbos, in Messene, where they resemble the flowers that grow in the hedges, and at Rhodes.

The magicians make other distinctions in reference to these stones: those, they tell us, which have spots upon them like the spots on the lion’s skin, are efficacious as a protection against scorpions; and in Persia, they say, these stones are used, by way of fumigation, for arresting tempests and hurricanes, and for stopping the course of rivers, the proof of their efficacy being their turning the water cold, if thrown into a boiling cauldron. To be duly efficacious, they must be attached to the body with hairs from a lion’s mane. The hair, however, of the hyæna is held in abomination for this purpose, as being a promoter of discord in families. The stone that is of an uniform colour renders athletes invincible, they say: the way of testing it is to throw it, along with colouring matter, into a pot full of oil; after being kept for a couple of hours gently on the boil, if genuine, it will impart an uniform colour of vermilion to the mixture.

Acopos [“Refreshing” stone. Hardly any of these stones appear to be identified.] is a stone like nitre [As to the “nitrum” of Pliny, see B. xxxi. c. 46.] in appearance, porous, and starred with drops of gold: gently boiled with oil and applied as an unguent, it relieves lassitude, if we choose to believe it. Alabastritis [Probably the same as the Alabastrites of B. xxxv. c..] is a stone which comes from Alabastron in Egypt and Damascus in Syria: it is of a white colour, spotted with various other tints. Calcined with fossil salt and pulverized, it is a cure for affections of the mouth and teeth, it is said. Alectoria [From the Greek, ἀλέκτωρ, a “cock.”] is the name given to a stone that is found in the crop of poultry, like crystal in appearance, and about as large as a bean in size: Milo [See B. vii. c. 19.] of Crotona, some will have it, was thought to be in the habit of carrying this stone about him, a thing that rendered him invincible in his athletic contests. Androdamas [“Man-subduing.” Identified by some with Marcasite, or White iron pyrites.] has the shining colour of silver, like adamas; [See Chapter of this Book.] it is always quadrangular, like small cubes in shape. The magicians are of opinion that it was thus named from the fact that it subdues anger and violence in man. Whether argyrodamas [“Silver-subduing.”] is the same stone or not, authors do not inform us. Antipathes [“Counteracting-stone.”] is a black stone, and not transparent: the mode of testing it, is by boiling it in milk, to which, if genuine, it imparts a colour like that of myrrh. A person might probably expect to find some extraordinary virtues in this stone, seeing that, among so many other substances possessed of antipathetic properties, it is the only one that bears this name. The magicians will have it that it possesses the power of counteracting fascinations.

Arabica [Probably the stone mentioned in B. xxxvi. c..] is a stone which closely resembles ivory in appearance, and, indeed, might easily be taken for it, were it not for its superior hardness: persons who have this stone about them, it is thought, will experience a cure of diseases of the sinews. Aromatitis, [“Aromatic stone.” Cæsalpinus is of opinion that this is grey or clouded amber.] too, is a stone that is found in Arabia, as also in the vicinity of Phiræ in Egypt: it is always full of small stones, and like myrrh in colour and smell, a thing that makes it much in request with ladies of rank. [“Reginis.”] Asbestos [See B. xix. c. 4, and B. xxxvi. c..] is found in the mountains of Arcadia, and is of an iron colour. Democritus informs us that aspisatis [The reading is doubtful.] is a native of Arabia, that it is of a fiery colour, and that patients should wear it attached to the body with camels’ dung; he says, too, that it is found in the nests of certain birds [Called “melancoryphi” in Chapter.] in Arabia. The same writer also mentions another stone of this name, that is found at Leucopetra in the same country, of a silver colour, radiant, and an excellent preservative against delirium. In India, he says, and on Mount Acidane in Persia, there is a stone found that is known as “atizoë,” [Ajasson thinks that the reading should be “Aeizoe,” from the Greek ἀειζώη, “long lived.”] of a silver lustre, three fingers in length, like a lentil in shape, possessed of a pleasant smell, and considered necessary by the Magi at the consecration of a king. Augetis [“Shining stone,” apparently.] is thought by many to be identical with callaina. [See Chapter of this Book.] Amphidanes, [The reading is doubtful.] which is also known as “chrysocolla,” [See B. xxxiii. c.: where a fossil Chrysocolla is also mentioned.] is a stone found in that part of India where the ants [See B. xi. c. 36, and B. xxxiii. c..] throw up gold, and in it there are certain square pieces, like gold in appearance. The nature of this stone, it is asserted, is similar to that of the magnet; in addition to which, it is said to have the property of increasing gold.

Aphrodisiaca [“Gem of Aphrodite” or “Venus.” Thought by Dalechamps and Hardouin to have been a kind of agate.] is a stone of a reddish white colour. Apsyctos, [“Which never grows cold.”] when heated by fire, retains the warmth so long as seven days; it is black and ponderous, and is streaked with red veins. It is good too, it is thought, as a preservative against cold. According to Iacchus, Ægyptilla [A kind of Onyx, Dalechamps thinks.] is a kind of white and black sarda, intersected with veins; but the stone commonly known by that name is black at the lower part, and azure on the surface. It takes its name from the country that produces it.

### Chap. 55.—Balanites. Batrachitis. Baptes. Beli Oculus. Belus. Baroptenus or Barippe. Botryitis. Bostrychitis. Bucardia. Brontea. Bolos.

Of balanites [“Acorn stone.” Like an olive in appearance, and now known as “Jew stone,” probably, a fossil.] there are two kinds, the one of a greenish hue, and the other like Corinthian bronze in appearance; the former comes from Coptos, and the latter from Troglodytica. They are both of them intersected by a flame-like vein, which runs through the middle. Coptos, too, sends us batrachitis; [“Frog-stone.” Varieties of quartz, probably.] one kind of which is like a frog in colour, another has the tint of ebony, and a third is blackish inclining to red. Baptes [“Dipped stone.” Dalechamps says that it was amber stained with alkanet, but on what authority does not appear.] is a soft stone, and of a most excellent smell. Beli oculus [“Eye of Belus.” Supposed by Ajasson and Desfontaines to be Cat’s eye Chalcedony. See Chapter 50, Note.] is a stone of a whitish hue, surrounding a black pupil in the middle, which shines amid a lustre like that of gold. This stone, in consequence of its singular beauty, has been consecrated to the deity [Belus, the father of Ninus, the “Bel” of Scripture. See Chapter.] held in the highest veneration by the people of Assyria. According to Democritus, there is also a stone called belus, and found at Arbela; it is about the size of a walnut, and looks [A kind of Tecolithos, Dalechamps says. See B. xxxvi. c., and Chapter of this Book.] like glass. Baroptenus or barippe is black, and covered with knots of a white and blood-red colour: the use of it as an amulet is avoided, as being apt to produce monstrosities.

Botryitis [“Grape-cluster stone.”] is sometimes black and sometimes purple-red, [“Puniceus” seems to be a preferable reading to “pampineus,” “like a vine-tendril,” given by the Bamberg MS.] and resembles a bunch of grapes [Possibly it may have been Datholite or Borate of lime, a variety of which is known as Botryolite.] in form, when making its first appearance. Zoroaster says, that bostrychitis [“Hair-stone.” This was probably either Iron alum, known also as Alun de plume; Alunogen, known also as Feather Alum or hair salt; or Amianthus, also called satin Asbestus. See B. xxxvi. c..] is a stone which is more like the hair of females than anything else. Bucardia [“Ox-heart.” Supposed to be a sort of Turquois, Hardouin says.] resembles an ox-heart in appearance, and is only found at Babylon. Brontea [“Thunder-stone.”] is a stone like the head of a tortoise, which falls with thunder, it is supposed: if too, we are to believe what is said, it has the property of quenching the fire in objects that have been struck by lightning. Bolos [“Clod-stone.” It may possibly have been a kind of Geodes. See B. xxxvi. c.. Dalechamps, however, identifies it with Crapaudine, Toad-stone, or Bufonite, supposed in former times to be produced by the toad, but in reality the fossil tooth of a fish.] is the name of a stone found in Iberia, [See B. iii. c. 4.] similar to a clod of earth in appearance.

### Chap. 56.—Cadmitis. Callais. Capnitis. Cappadocia. Callaica. Catochitis. Catoptritis. Cepitis or Cepolatitis. Ceramitis. Cinædia. Ceritis. Circos. Corsoïdes. Coralloachates. Corallis. Crateritis. Crocallis. Cyitis. Chalcophonos. Chelidonia. Chelonia. Chelonitis. Chloritis. Choaspitis. Chrysolampis. Chrysopis. Ceponides.

Cadmitis differs only from the stone that is known as ostracitis [See B. xxxiv. c., and Chapter of this Book.] in being sometimes surrounded with blisters of an azure colour. Callais [Identical, probably, with the Callaina of Chapter, our Turquois.] is like sapphiros [Lapis lazuli.] in colour, only that it is paler and more closely resembles the tint of the water near the sea-shore in appearance. Capnitis, [“Smoke-stone.” Identical with the jasper called “capnias,” in Chapter.] in the opinion of some, is a peculiar species of stone: it is covered with numerous spiral streaks, of a smoky colour, as already [In Chapter of this Book.] stated in the appropriate place. Cappadocia [“Cappadocian stone.”] is a native of Phrygia, and resembles ivory in appearance. Callaica [Like the “callaina” or “callais.”] is the name given to a stone like a clouded callaina; [See Chapter of this Book.] a number of them are always found united, it is said. Catochitis [“Attractive stone.” A large rocky stone, according to Solinus. Dalechamps thinks that it must have been a kind of amber or bitumen, an opinion with which Desfontaines coincides.] is a stone found in Corsica, of larger size than the other precious stones; and of a more wonderful nature, if the story is true, that it retains the hand like gum, when placed upon it. Catoptritis [“Looking-glass stone,” or “mirror stone.” A variety of Specular stone, probably.] is found in Cappadocia, and, from its whiteness, reflects figures like a mirror. Cepitis [“Onion stone.” A kind of agate, according to Dalechamps. It had its name probably from the union of its streaks like those on the neck of an onion.] or cepolatitis is a white stone, with veins upon it uniting together. Ceramitis [“Pottery stone.”] has a colour like that of earthenware.

Cinædia [See B. xxix. c. 38, Vol. V. p. 415.] is a stone found in the brain of a fish [The Cinædus. See B. xxxii. c..] of a corresponding name. It is white and oblong, and possessed of marvellous virtues, if we are to put faith in what is said, that it announces before-hand whether the sea will be tranquil or stormy. [By its clear or clouded colour, it was said.] Ceritis [“Wax stone.”] is a stone like wax: circos [From κίρκος, a “hawk” or “falcon.”] resembles the plumage of the hawk: corsoides [“Hair-like;” from κόρση, the “hair.”] is like white hair in appearance. Coralloachates [“Coral agate.” See Chapter of this Book.] is very similar to coral, marked with drops of gold; and corallis, a native of India and Syene, resembles minium [Vermilion. See B. xxxiii. cc.,.] in appearance. Crateritis [“Strong stone”—from κρατερὸς, “strong.” Supposed by some to have been amber-coloured Hyacinth.] is in colour a medium between chrysolithos [Oriental topaz, probably. See Chapters and of this Book.] and amber, and is remarkable for its hardness. Crocallis [“Saffron-coloured,” probably. If this is the meaning of the name, it may be supposed to have resembled the bigaroon cherry.] is a gem like the cherry in its tints. Cyitis [“Pregnant stone. An aëtites or geodes, probably. See B. xxx. c. 44, and B. xxxvi. c..] is a stone found in the vicinity of Coptos; it is white, and to all appearance has an embryo stone within, the rattling of which may be heard on shaking it. Chalcophonos [“Sounding like brass.” Probably Clinkstone or Phonolite, a compact feldspathic rock of a greyish colour, clinking under the hammer when struck, somewhat like a metal.] is a black stone, but when struck it clinks like brass: tragic actors are recommended to carry it about them. Of chelidonia [“Swallow-stone.”] there are two varieties, both resembling the swallow in colour: one of them is purple on one side, and the other is purple besprinkled with black spots. Chelonia [“Tortoise-stone.”] is the eye of the Indian tortoise, and is the most marvellous of all the stones, if we believe the lying stories told by the magicians. For, according to them, this stone, placed upon the tongue after rinsing the mouth with honey, will ensure power of divination, if this is done at full moon or new moon, for one whole day. If, however, this plan is adopted while the moon is on the increase, the power of divination will be acquired before sun-rise only, and if upon other days, from the first [Six in the morning until mid-day.] hour to the sixth.

Chelonitis, [“Tortoise-like stone.”] too, is a stone that resembles the tortoise [“Chelone,” in Greek.] in appearance, and the many virtues of which are talked of for calming storms and tempests. As to the one that has all the appearance of being sprinkled with spots of gold, if thrown with a scarabæus into boiling water, it will raise a tempest, they say. Chloritis [“Grass-green stone.” It is just possible that the Chlorite of modern Mineralogy, a kind of emerald-green talc, or hydrous silicate of magnesia, may be meant: but we must dismiss the story of the wagtail.] is a stone of a grass-green colour: according to the magicians, it is found in the crop of the motacilla, [The pied wagtail, Motacilla alba of Linnæus.] being engendered with the bird. They recommend also that it should be set in iron, for the purpose of working certain portentous marvels which they promise, as usual. Choaspitis is a stone so called from the river Choaspes, [See B. vi. c. 31.] of a brilliant, golden colour mixed with green. Chrysolampis [“Golden light.” Ajasson suggests that this may have been a yellow phosphate of lead, which emitted light at night, from its close vicinity to naphtha. Bologna stone, Bolognian spar, or sulphate of Barytes, has also been suggested. Topaz, too, is mentioned.] is a native of Æthiopia, and is pale by day, but of a fiery lustre by night. Chrysopis [“Golden face.”] has all the appearance of gold. [A variety of Hyacinth, according to Dalechamps.] Ceponides [From κηπὸς, “a garden,” it is thought; on account of its varied colours.] is found at Atarna, a borough, and once a city, of Æolis. It is transparent, presents numerous tints, and has sometimes the appearance of glass, sometimes of crystal, and sometimes of iaspis. Indeed, the stones of this kind that are tarnished even, are possessed of such singular brilliancy as to reflect objects like a mirror.

### Chap. 57.—Daphnea. Diadochos. Diphyes. Dionysias. Draconitis.

Daphnea [“Laurel-stone.”] is mentioned by Zoroaster as curative of epilepsy. Diadochos [“Substitute” for beryl.] is a stone that resembles the beryl. Of diphyes [“Two-formed,” or “of a double nature.” A grand acquisition, as Ajasson remarks, for the worshippers of Priapus. See a similar characteristic in the Eryngium, our Eringo, B. xxii. c. 9: also Mandragora, B. xxv. c. 94, Note 877.] there are two kinds, the white and the black, male and female, with a line dividing the characteristics of either sex. Dionysias [“Stone of Dionysus” or “Bacchus.”] is hard and black, and covered with red spots. Triturated in water, this stone imparts to it the flavour of wine, and it is generally thought to be a preservative against intoxication. Draconitis [“Dragon stone.”] or dracontia is a stone produced from the brain of the dragon; [The serpent so called—“draco.” See B. xxix. c. 20.] but unless the head of the animal is cut off while it is alive, the stone will not assume the form of a gem, through spite on the part of the serpent, when finding itself at the point of death: hence it is that, for this purpose, the head is cut off when it is asleep. [A story invented, no doubt, by the sellers of some kind of precious stone.]

Sotacus, who tells us that he once saw a stone of this kind in the possession of a king, says that persons go in search of it in a chariot drawn by two horses; and that, the moment they see the serpent, they strew narcotic drugs in its way, and then cut off its head when asleep. According to him, this stone is white and pellucid, and admits of no polishing or engraving.

### Chap. 58.—Encardia or Ariste. Enorchis. Exebenus. Erythallis. Erotylos. Amphicomos, or Hieromnemon. Eumeces. Eumithres. Eupetalos. Eureos. Eurotias. Eusebes. Epimelas.

The stone encardia [“Heart-shaped.” A turquois, Hardouin thinks. See “Bucardia” in Chapter above.] is also called “ariste.” [“The best.”] There are three varieties of it; one of a black colour, with a figure in relief upon it like a heart; a second of a green colour, and like a heart in shape; and a third, with a black heart upon it, the rest of the stone being white. Enorchis [“Formed like the testes.”] is a white stone, the fragments of which, when it is split asunder, resemble the testes in shape. Exebenus, Zoroaster tells us, is a white, handsome stone, employed by goldsmiths for polishing gold. Erythallis, [“Red stone,” apparently. The reading is very doubtful.] though a white stone, assumes a red hue when viewed at an inclined angle. Erotylos, [The reading is doubtful, but the word may possibly mean “stone of love,” or something equivalent.] also known as “amphicomos” [“Fine-haired.”] and “hieromnemon,” [“Skilled in sacred matters.”] is highly praised by Democritus for its use in the art of divination.

Eumeces [“Of fair length.” Ajasson thinks that this may have been a variety of Pyromachic silex, or gun flint, nearly allied to Chalcedony.] is a stone of Bactriana, like silex in appearance; placed beneath the head, it produces visions in the night of an oracular description. Eumithres [A preferable reading, probably, to “Eumitres.” It perhaps took its name from Mithres, the god of the Sun among the Persians, and meant “blessing of Mithres.” Ajasson thinks that it may have been green Tourmaline, and that its electric properties may have been very “serviceable to the charlatans who had the monopoly of the Temple of Bel.”] is called by the Assyrians “gem of Belus,” [See Chapter of this Book.] the most sacred of all their gods; it is of a leek-green colour, and greatly in request for superstitious purposes. Eupetalos [“With beautiful leaves.” By some authorities this is thought to be Opal, by others Heliotrope or Bloodstone. Ajasson thinks that it may have been a general name for Jasper quartz, or else that it was Quartz agate opalized.] is a stone that has four different tints, azure, fiery, vermilion, and apple-colour. Eureos [This reading is very doubtful.] is similar to an olive-stone in form, streaked like a shell, and moderately white. Eurotias [“Mouldy stone.”] has all the appearance of concealing its black colour beneath a coat of mould. Eusebes [“Stone of the religious.”] is the stone, it is said, of which the seat was made in the Temple of Hercules at Tyrus, from which the pious [only] could raise themselves without difficulty. Epimelas [“Black on the surface.” This is the case, Ajasson remarks, with many stones of the class known as “Cat’s eye.”] is a white gem, with a black hue reflected from its surface.

### Chap. 59.—Galaxias. Galactitis, Leucogæa, Leucographitis, or Synnephitis. Gallaica. Gassinade. Glossopetra. Gorgonia. Goniæa.

Galaxias, [“Galaxy stone.” Ajasson thinks that this may possibly have been an Opal, or a dead white Topaz, traversed by lines of other colours.] by some called “galactitis,” [“Milk stone.”] is a stone that closely resembles those next mentioned, but is interspersed with veins of blood-red or white. Galactitis [Probably milk-white Quartz, Ajasson thinks.] is of the uniform colour of milk; other names given to it are, leucogæa, [“White earth.”] leucographitis, [“White-streaked stone.”] and synnephitis, [“Clouded.”] and, when pounded in water, both in taste and colour it marvellously resembles milk. This stone promotes the secretion of the milk in nursing women, it is said; in addition to which, attached to the neck of infants, it produces saliva, and it dissolves when put into the mouth. They say, too, that it deprives persons of their memory: it is in the rivers Nilus and Acheloüs that it is produced. Some persons give the name of “galactitis” to a smaragdus surrounded with veins of white. Gallaica is a stone like argyrodamas, [See Chapter of this Book.] but of a somewhat more soiled appearance; these stones are found in twos and threes clustered together. The people of Media send us gassinade, [An Eastern name, probably.] a stone like orobus in colour, and sprinkled with flowers, as it were: it is found at Arbela. This stone, too, conceives, [A Geodes or Aëtites, probably. See B. xxxvi. c., and Chapter 56 of this Book, Note.] it is said; a fact which it admits when shaken; the conception lasting for a period of three months. Glossopetra, [“Tongue of stone.”] which resembles the human tongue, is not engendered, it is said, in the earth, but falls from the heavens during the moon’s eclipse; it is considered highly necessary for the purposes of selenomancy. [Divination from the appearance of the moon.] To render all this however, still more incredible, we have the evident untruthfulness of one assertion made about it, that it has the property of silencing the winds. Gorgonia [“Gorgon stone.” The head of the Gorgon Medusa was fabled to turn those into stone who looked upon it.] is nothing but a coral, which has been thus named from the circumstance that, though soft in the sea, it afterwards assumes the hardness of stone: it has the property of counteracting fascinations, [See B. xxxii. c..] it is said. Goniæa, [This reading is very doubtful.] it is asserted, and with the same degree of untruthfulness, ensures vengeance upon our enemies.

### Chap. 60.—Heliotropium. Hephæstitis. Hermuaidoion. Hexecontalithos. Hieracitis. Hammitis. Hammonis Cornu. Hormiscion. Hyænia. Hæmatitis.

Heliotropium [Now known as Heliotrope, bloodstone, or blood jasper. It is of a deep-green colour, with red spots.] is found in Æthiopia, Africa, and Cyprus: it is of a leek-green colour, streaked with blood-red veins. It has been thus named, [“Turning under the sun.”] from the circumstance that, if placed in a vessel of water and exposed to the full light of the sun, it changes to a reflected colour like that of blood; this being the case with the stone of Æthiopia more particularly. Out of the water, too, it reflects the figure of the sun like a mirror, and it discovers eclipses of that luminary by showing the moon passing over its disk. In the use of this stone, also, we have a most glaring illustration of the impudent effrontery of the adepts in magic, for they say that, if it is combined with the plant [See B. xxii. c. 29.] heliotropium, and certain incantations are then repeated over it, it will render the person invisible who carries it about him.

Hephæstitis [“Stone of Hephæstos” or “Vulcan.”] also, though a radiant stone, partakes of the properties of a mirror in reflecting objects. The mode of testing it is to put it into boiling water, which should immediately become cold. If exposed to the rays of the sun, it should instantly cause dry fuel to ignite: [It acting as a burning-glass, probably.] Corycus [See B. iv. c. 20, and B. v. c. 22.] is the place where it is found. Hermuaidoion [“Genitals of Mercury.” This singular stone does not appear to have been identified. See Note above.] is so called from the resemblance to the male organs which it presents, on a ground that is sometimes white, sometimes black, and sometimes of a pallid hue, with a circle surrounding it of a golden colour. Hexecontalithos [“Sixty colour stone.”] receives its name from the numerous variety of colours which, small as it is, it presents: it is found in Troglodytica. [See B. v. cc. 5, 8, and B. vi. c. 34.] Hieracitis [“Hawk stone.” It is perhaps identical with the “Circos,” mentioned in Chapter. Aëtius says that Hieracitis was of a greenish hue.] is entirely covered with mottled streaks, resembling a kite’s feathers alternately with black. Hammitis [“Sand-stone.” Ajasson thinks that this was a granular quartz, of a friable nature when subjected to compression.] is similar in appearance to the spawn of fish: there is also one variety of it which has all the appearance of being composed of nitre, [As to the identity of “nitrum,” see B, xxxi. c, 46.] except that it is remarkably hard. Hammonis cornu [“Horn of [Jupiter] Hammon.” He here alludes to the Ammonites of modern Geology, an extinct race of molluscous animals that inhabited convoluted shells, and which are commonly known as “snake-stones.” They abound in strata of the secondary formation, and vary from the size of a bean to that of a coach-wheel.] is reckoned among the most sacred gems of Æthiopia; it is of a golden colour, like a ram’s horn in shape, and ensures prophetic dreams, it is said.

Hormiscion [The reading of this word is doubtful.] is one of the most pleasing stones to the sight; it is of a fiery colour, and emits rays like gold, tipped at the extremity with a whitish light. Hyænia [“Hyæna stone.”] is derived from the eyes of the hyæna, it is said, the animal being hunted to obtain it; placed beneath the tongue, if we believe the story, it will enable a person to prophesy the future. Hæmatitis, [As to this stone, see B. xxxvi. c..] of the very finest quality, comes from Æthiopia, but it is found in Arabia and Africa as well. It is a stone of a blood-red colour, and we must not omit to mention the assurance given [by the magicians], that the possession of it reveals treacherous designs on the part of the barbarians. Zachalias of Babylon, in the books which he dedicated to King Mithridates, attributing the destinies of man to certain properties innate in precious stones, is not content with vaunting the merits of this stone as curative of diseases of the eyes and liver, but recommends it also as ensuring success to petitions addressed to kings. He also makes it play its part in lawsuits and judgments, and even goes so far as to say that it is highly beneficial to be rubbed with it on the field of battle. There is another stone of the same class, called “menui” by the people of India, and “xanthos” [“Yellow” stone. See Chapter.] by the Greeks: it is of a whitish, tawny colour.

### Chap. 61.—Idæi Dactyli. Icterias. Jovis Gemma. Indica. Ion.

The stones called Idæi dactyli, [“Idæan fingers.” These were probably Belemnites, so called from their long, tapering shape, and being first observed, perhaps, on Mount Ida in Crete. Belemnites are the shells of fossil Cephalopods, and are commonly known as “thunder stones.”] and found in Crete, are of an iron colour, and resemble the human thumb in shape. The colour of icterias [“Jaundice stone.”] resembles that of livid skin, and hence it is that it has been thought so excellent a remedy for jaundice. There is also another stone of this name, of a still more livid colour; while a third has all the appearance of a leaf. This last is broader than the others, almost imponderous, and streaked with livid veins. A fourth kind again is of the same colour, but blacker, and marked all over with livid veins. Jovis gemma [“Gem of Jove.”] is a white stone, very light, and soft: another name given to it is “drosolithos.” [“Dew stone.”] Indica [“Indian stone.”] retains the name of the country that produces it: it is a stone of a reddish colour, and yields a purple liquid [It is just possible that he may be thinking of Indigo here, which he has before called by the same name. See B. xxxiii. c..] when rubbed. There is another stone also of this name, white, and of a dusty appearance. Ion [“Violet-coloured.”] is an Indian stone, of a violet tint: it is but rarely, however, that it is found of a deep, full, colour.

### Chap. 62.—Lepidotis. Lesbias. Leucophthalmos. Leucopœcilos. Libanochrus. Limoniatis. Liparea. Lysimachos. Leucochrysos.

Lepidotis [“Scale stone.” A fossil, probably.] is a stone of various colours, and resembles the scales of fish in appearance. Lesbias, so called from Lesbos which produces it, is a stone found in India as well. Leucophthalmos, [“White eye.” Cat’s eye chalcedony, perhaps. See “Astrobolos” in Chapter, and “Beli oculus” in Chapter, of this Book.] which in other respects is of a reddish hue, presents all the appearance of an eye, in white and black. Leucopœcilos [“Variegated with white.”] is white, variegated with drops of vermilion of a golden hue. Libanochrus [“Yellow incense.”] strongly resembles frankincense, and yields a liquid like honey. Limoniatis [“Meadow-green stone.”] would appear to be the same as smaragdus; and all that we find said about liparea [“Fat stone.”] is, that employed in the form of a fumigation, it allures all kinds of wild beasts. Lysimachos resembles Rhodian marble, with veins of gold: in polishing it, it is reduced very considerably in size, in order to remove all defects. Leucochrysos [“White gold.” Ajasson thinks that this may have been either a sub-variety of Hyalin amethystine quartz, a yellow quartz or false topaz, or else an unctuous, white quartz, either opaque or transparent.] is a kind of chrysolithos interspersed with white.
