---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 15-18."
chapter_order: 39
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 15. (14.)—Judæa.

Beyond Idumæa and Samaria, Judæa extends far and wide. That part of it which joins up to Syria [Antiochian Syria.] is called Galilæa, while that which is nearest to Arabia and Egypt bears the name of Peræa [Peræa was the general name of that part of Palæstina which lay east of the river Jordan; but more usually, in a restricted sense, it signified a part only of that region, namely the district between the rivers Hieromax on the north, and Arnon on the south.]. This last is thickly covered with rugged mountains, and is separated from the rest of Judæa by the river Jordanes. The remaining part of Judæa is divided into ten Toparchies, which we will mention in the following order:—That of Hiericus [Jericho, so often mentioned in Scripture. It was celebrated for its palm-grove, which was presented by Antony to Cleopatra. A Bedouin encampment called Riha is all that now occupies its site.], covered with groves of palm-trees, and watered by numerous springs, and those of Emmaüs [A city eight or ten miles from the village Emmaüs of the New Testament. It was called Nicopolis, in commemoration, it has been suggested, of the destruction of Jerusalem. Its site is still marked by a village called Ammious, on the road from Jerusalem to Jaffa.], Lydda [So often mentioned in the New Testament. This town lay to the S.E. of Joppa, and N.W. of Jerusalem, at the junction of several roads which lead from the sea-coast. It was destroyed by the Romans in the Jewish war, but was soon after rebuilt, and called Diospolis. A village called Lud occupies its site.], Joppe, Acrabatena [So called from Acrabbim, its chief town, situate nine miles from Nicopolis. The toparchy of Acrabbim, which formerly formed part of Samaria, was the most northerly of those of Judæa.], Gophna [Situate in the country of Benjamin. Josephus reckons it second in importance only to Jerusalem, from which, according to Eusebius, it was distant fifteen miles, on the road to the modern Nablous. That author also identifies it with the Eshcol of Scripture. Its site is marked by a small Christian village, called by the natives Jufna.], Thamna [Like the two preceding ones, this toparchy for a long time belonged to Samaria. Thamna, or Thamnis, was the Timnath-Serah in Mount Ephraim, mentioned in Joshua xix. 50, and xxiv. 30, as the place where Joshua was buried.], Bethleptephene [The toparchy of Bethleptepha of other authors. It appears to have been situate in the south of Judæa, and in that part which is by Josephus commonly called Idumæa. Reland has remarked, that the name resembles Beth-lebaoth, a city of the tribe of Simeon, mentioned in Joshua xix. 6.], Orina [From the Greek, meaning the “mountain district,” or the “hill country,” as mentioned in Luke i. 39.], in which formerly stood Hierosolyma [Or “Sacred Solyma.”], by far the most famous city, not of Judæa only, but of the East, and Herodium [A fortress of Palæstina, erected by Herod the Great, at a distance of about sixty stadia from Jerusalem, and not far from Tekoa. Its site has been identified by modern travellers with El-Furedis, or the Paradise; probably the same as the spot called the “Frank Mountain,” on the top of which the ruined walls of the fortress are still to be seen.], with a celebrated town of the same name.

(15.) The river Jordanes [Called by the Arabs Bahr-el-Arden.] rises from the spring of Panias [Situate on Mount Panias, or Paneas, on the range of Anti-Libanus.], which has given its surname to Cæsarea, of which we shall have occasion to speak [In C. of the present Book.]. This is a delightful stream, and, so far as the situation of the localities will allow of, winds along [On the contrary, as Parisot observes, the Jordan runs in a straight line almost into the Dead Sea.] in its course and lingers among the dwellers upon its banks. With the greatest reluctance, as it were, it moves onward towards Asphaltites [The Lake of Sodom, or the Dead Sea, in which the Cities of the Plain were swallowed up.], a lake of a gloomy and unpropitious nature, by which it is at last swallowed up, and its bepraised waters are lost sight of on being mingled with the pestilential streams of the lake. For this reason it is that, as soon as ever the valleys through which it runs afford it the opportunity, it discharges itself into a lake, by many writers known as Genesara [In Scripture also called the Lake Tiberias, and the Sea of Gennesareth, or Chinnereth. It is now called the Sea of Tabariah, or Tabarieh.], sixteen miles in length and six wide; which is skirted by the pleasant towns of Julias [The one of the two Bethsaidas, which was situate on the north of the Sea of Tiberias. It was enlarged by Philip the Tetrarch, who greatly beautified it, and changed its name to Julias, in honour of the daughter of Augustus, the wife of Tiberius. It is generally supposed by the learned world, that this was not the Bethsaida mentioned so often in the New Testament. Its ruins are probably those now seen on a hill called Et-Tell, on the north-western extremity of the lake.] and Hippo [On the east of the lake. From it the district of Hippene took its name.] on the east, of Tarichea [Its ruins are to be seen at El-Kereh, on the south side of the lake. It was strongly fortified, and made a vigorous resistance against the Romans in the Jewish War. It received its name from the great quantities of fish which were salted there, τάριχοι.] on the south (a name which is by many persons given to the lake itself), and of Tiberias [Now Tabariah, or Tabarieh, a miserable village. It was built by Herod Antipas, in honour of the Emperor Tiberius. After the destruction of Jerusalem, it became the seat of the Jewish Sanhedrin.] on the west, the hot springs [These hot springs are by Josephus called Emmaüs, probably a form of the Hebrew name Hammath. Dr. Robinson, in his Biblical Researches, identifies this with the town of Hammath, of the tribe of Naphthali, mentioned in Joshua xix. 35.] of which are so conducive to the restoration of health.

(16.) Asphaltites [From the Greek ἄσφαλτος.] produces nothing whatever except bitumen, to which indeed it owes its name. The bodies of animals will not sink [This is an exaggeration, though it is the fact that many heavy substances, which in ordinary water would sink immediately, will float on the surface of this lake. It has been suggested, that the story here mentioned arose from the circumstance of the name of ‘bulls,’ or ‘cows,’ having been applied by the ancient Nabatæi to the large masses of asphaltum which floated on its surface.] in its waters, and even those of bulls and camels float there. In length it exceeds 100 miles being at its greatest breadth twenty-five, and at its smallest six. Arabia of the Nomades [The country of the Arabian Scenitæ, or “tent people.”] faces it on the east, and Machærus on the south [It lay on the east of the Dead Sea, and not the south, as here mentioned by Pliny, being a border fortress in the south of Peræa, and on the confines of the Nabatæi. There was a tradition that it was at this place that John the Baptist was beheaded. The city now bears the name of Mascra.], at one time, next to Hierosolyma, the most strongly fortified place in Judæa. On the same side lies Callirrhoë [A Greek name, signifying the “Fine Stream.” These were warm springs, situate on the eastern side of Jordan, to which Herod the Great resorted during his last illness, by the advice of his physicians. The valley of Callirhoë was visited by Captains Irby and Mangles in 1818, and an interesting account of it is to be found in their ‘Travels,’ pp. 467-469. The waters are sulphureous to the taste.], a warm spring, remarkable for its medicinal qualities, and which, by its name, indicates the celebrity its waters have gained.

(17.) Lying on the west of Asphaltites, and sufficiently distant to escape its noxious exhalations, are the Esseni [The Essenes, or Hessenes. These properly formed one of the great sects into which the Jews were divided in the time of Christ. They are not mentioned by name in the New Testament, but it has been conjectured that they are alluded to in Matt. xix. 12, and Col. ii. 18, 23. As stated here by Pliny, they generally lived at a distance from large towns, in communities which bore a great resemblance to the monkish societies of later times. They sent gifts to the Temple at Jerusalem, but never offered sacrifices there. They were divided into four classes, according to the time of their initiation. Their origin is uncertain. Some writers look upon them as the same as the Assidians, or Chasidim, mentioned in 1 Maccabees, ii. 42, vii. 13. Their principal society was probably the one mentioned by Pliny, and from this other smaller ones proceeded, and spread over Palestine, Syria, and Egypt. The Essenes of Egypt were divided into two sects; the practical Essenes, whose mode of life was the same as those of Palestine; and the contemplative Essenes, who were called Therapeutæ. Both sects maintained the same doctrines; but the latter were distinguished by a more rigid mode of life. It has been suggested by Taylor, the editor of ‘Calmet’s Dictionary of the Bible,’ that John the Baptist belonged to this sect.], a people that live apart from the world, and marvellous beyond all others throughout the whole earth, for they have no women among them; to sexual desire they are strangers; money they have none; the palm-trees are their only companions. Day after day, however, their numbers are fully recruited by multitudes of strangers that resort to them, driven thither to adopt their usages by the tempests of fortune, and wearied with the miseries of life. Thus it is, that through thousands of ages, incredible to relate, this people eternally prolongs its existence, without a single birth taking place there; so fruitful a source of population to it is that weariness of life which is felt by others. Below this people was formerly the town of Engadda [Or Engedi. Its ancient name was Hazezon-Tamar, when it was inhabited by the Amorites. See Gen. xiv. 7; 2 Chron. xx. 2. According to Josephus, it gave name to one of the fifteen toparchies of Judæa. It still retains its name, Ain-Jedey, or “Fountain of the Goats,” and was so called from a spring which issued out of the limestone rock at the base of a lofty cliff.], second only to Hierosolyma in the fertility of its soil and its groves of palm-trees; now, like it, it is another heap of ashes. Next to it we come to Masada [Its site is now known as Sebbeh, on the south-west of the Dead Sea.], a fortress on a rock, not far from Lake Asphaltites. Thus much concerning Judæa.

### Chap. 16. (18.)—Decapolis.

On the side of Syria, joining up to Judæa, is the region of Decapolis [Δεκὰ πολεῖς, the “Ten Cities.” He alludes to the circumstance, that the number of cities varied from time to time in this district; one being destroyed in warfare, and others suddenly rising from its foundation.], so called from the number of its cities; as to which all writers are not agreed. Most of them, however, agree in speaking of Damascus [The capital city of Syria, both in ancient and modern times. It is now called Es-Sham. The only epithet given to it by the ancient poets is that of “ventosa,” or “windy,” found in the Pharsalia of Lucan, B. iii. l. 215, which, it has been remarked, is anything but appropriately chosen.] as one, a place fertilized by the river Chrysorroös [Or the “Golden River.” It is uncertain whether this was the Abana or Pharpar, mentioned in 2 Kings v. 12. Strabo remarks, that the waters of the Chrysorroös “are almost entirely consumed in irrigation, as it waters a large extent of deep soil.”], which is drawn off into its meadows and eagerly imbibed; Philadelphia [The ancient Rabbath Ammon, a city of the Ammonites. It was afterwards called Astarte, and then Philadelphia, in honour of Ptolemy Philadelphus. According to D’Anville, the present name of its site is Amman.], and Rhaphana [Thirty-three miles from Apamea. Its ruins are probably those mentioned by Abulfeda under the name of Rafaniat. William of Tyre says, that it was taken in the year 1125 by the Count of Tripoli.], all which cities fall back towards Arabia; Scythopolis [Previously called Beth-shan. It was the next city of the Decapolis in magnitude after Damascus. It was situate in the land of the tribe of Issachar, though it belonged to the Manasites. At this place the bodies of Saul and his sons were hung up by the Philistines; see 1 Sam. xxxi. 10-12. Reland suggests that it received the name of Scythopolis, not from a Scythian colony, but from the Succoth of Gen. xxxiii. 17, which appears to have been in its vicinity. Its ruins, which still bear the name of Baisan, are very extensive.] (formerly called Nysa by Father Liber, from his nurse having been buried there), its present name being derived from a Scythian colony which was established there; Gadara [Called by Josephus the capital of Peræa, and the chief place of the district of the Gadarenes of the Evangelists. Its ruins, about six miles south-east of the Sea of Galilee, are very extensive.], before which the river Hieromix [Still called the Yarmak, evidently from its ancient name. Hippo has been mentioned in the last Chapter.] flows; Hippo, which has been previously mentioned; Dion [Or Dium, between Pella and Gadara. In later times, this place was included in Roman Arabia.], Pella [Also called Butis. It was the most southerly of the ten cities which comprised the Decapolis, standing about five miles south of Scythopolis, or Beth-shan. Its exact site seems not to have been ascertained; but it has been suggested that it is the modern El-Bujeh. From the expression used by Pliny, it would appear to have had mineral waters in its vicinity.], rich with its waters; Galasa [Of this place nothing is known; but it is most probable that the Gerasa of Ptolemy and Josephus is meant. According to the former writer, it was thirty-five miles from Pella. Its site is marked by extensive ruins, thirty-five miles east of the Jordan, known by the name of Gerash, and on the borders of the Great Desert of the Hauvan. According to Dr. Keith, the ruins bear extensive marks of splendour.], and Canatha [Ptolemy mentions a city of this name in Cœlesyria.]. The Tetrarchies [So called from having been originally groups of four principalities, held by princes who were vassals to the Roman emperors, or the kings of Syria.] lie between and around these cities, equal, each of them, to a kingdom, and occupying the same rank as so many kingdoms. Their names are, Trachonitis [Containing the northern district of Palestine, beyond the Jordan, between Antilibanus and the mountains of Arabia. It was bounded on the north by the territory of Damascus, on the east by Auranitis, on the south by Ituræa, and on the west by Gaulanitis. It was so called from its ranges of rocky mountains, or τραχῶνες, the caves in which gave refuge to numerous bands of robbers.], Panias [So called from the mountain of that name. Cæsarea Philippi also bore the name of Panias. It was situate at the south of Mount Hermon, on the Jordan, just below its source. It was built by Philip the Tetrarch, B.C. 3. King Agrippa called it Neronias; but it soon lost that name.], in which is Cæsarea, with the spring previously mentioned [In C. xiv. of the present Book, as that in which the Jordan takes its rise.], Abila [A place of great strength in Cœle-Syria, now known as Nebi Abel, situate between Heliopolis and Damascus.], Arca [Situate between Tripolis and Antaradus, at the north-west foot of Mount Libanus. It lay within a short distance of the sea, and was famous for the worship paid by its inhabitants to Astarte, the Syrian Aphrodite. A temple was erected here to Alexander the Great, in which Alexander Severus, the Roman Emperor, was born, his parents having resorted thither to celebrate a festival, A.D. 205. From this circumstance, its name was changed to Cæsarea. Burckhardt fixes its site at a hill called Tel-Arka.], Ampeloëssa [Of this place, which probably took its name from its numerous vines, nothing whatever is known.], and Gabe [Called by Pliny, in B. xii. c. 41, Gabba. It was situate at the foot of Mount Carmel between Cæsarea and Ptolemais, sixteen miles from the former. No remains of it are to be seen. It must not be confounded with Gabala, in Galilee, fortified by Herod the Great.].

### Chap. 17. (19.)—Phœnice.

We must now return to the coast and to Phœnice. There was formerly a town here known as Crocodilon; there is still a river [The town was situate between Cæsarea and Ptolemais. The river has been identified with the modern Nahi-el-Zerka, in which, according to Pococke, crocodiles have been found.] of that name: Dorum [Called Dor, before the conquest of Canaan by the Israelites. See Joshua xvii. 11, and Judges i. 27. It afterwards belonged to the half-tribe of Manasseh. Its site is now called Tortura.] and Sycaminon [Its site is now called Atlik, according to D’Anville. Parisot suggests that it is the modern Keufah; others that it is Hepha, near Mount Carmel.] are the names of cities of which the remembrance only exists. We then come to the Promontory of Carmelus [Insignificant in height and extent, but celebrated in Scripture history. It still bears the name of Cape Carmel.], and, upon the mountain, a town [It is not improbable that he means the town of Porphyrium, now Khaifa, at the foot of the mountain.] of that name, formerly called Acbatana. Next to this are Getta [Probably the Gitta of Polybius. Of it and Jeba, nothing is known.], Jeba, and the river Pacida, or Belus [The Nahr-Naman, or Abou, on which Ptolemais was situate.], which throws up on its narrow banks a kind of sand from which glass [Employed in the extensive manufacture of that article at Tyre and Sidon, to the north of this district.] is made: this river flows from the marshes of Cendebia, at the foot of Mount Carmelus. Close to this river is Ptolemais, formerly called Ace [A corruption of Acco, the native name; from which the English name Acre, and the French St. Jean d’Acre. The earliest mention of it is in the Book of Judges, i. 31. It is supposed that it was Ptolemy I., the son of Lagus, who enlarged it and gave it the name of Ptolemais. Its citadel, however, still retained the name of Ace. Under the Romans, Ptolemais, as mentioned by Pliny, was a colony, and belonged to Galilee. The modern city of Acre occupies its site.], a colony of Claudius Cæsar; and then the town of Ecdippa [The Ach-Zib of Scripture, mentioned in Joshua xix. 29, and Judges i. 31. Its ruins are to be seen near the sea-shore, about three hours’ journey north of Acre. The spot is still called Es-Zib.], and the promontory known as the White Promontory [Still called the Ras-el-Abiad, or White Promontory.]. We next come to the city of Tyre [A colony of the Sidonians: its scanty ruins are still to be seen at the poor village of Sur. The wars of the Crusades completed its downfall. The island is still joined to the mainland by the mole which was erected by Alexander the Great during the siege of the place; or, according to some, by the Syrians themselves.], formerly an island, separated from the mainland by a channel of the sea, of great depth, 700 paces in width, but now joined to it by the works which were thrown up by Alexander when besieging it,—the Tyre so famous in ancient times for its offspring, the cities to which it gave birth, Leptis, Utica, and Carthage [Carthage is supposed to have been colonized immediately by the people of Utica.],—that rival of the Roman sway, that thirsted so eagerly for the conquest of the whole earth; Gades, too, which she founded beyond the limits of the world. At the present day, all her fame is confined to the production of the murex and the purple [From which was made the famous Tyrian purple.]. Its circumference, including therein Palætyrus [Or “ancient Tyre,” which was built on the mainland.], is nineteen miles, the place itself extending twenty-two stadia. The next towns are Sarepta [The Zarephath of 1 Kings xvii. 9, 10, whither Elijah was sent to the widow, whose son he afterwards raised from the dead. Its site is now known as Sarfand.] and Ornithon [Probably meaning “City of the Birds,” perhaps from the quantities of game in its vicinity. Its site now bears the name of Adlan.], and then Sidon [Its site is now called Saïda. In the time of David and Solomon, it was probably subject to the kings of Tyre.], famous for its manufacture of glass, and the parent of Thebes [Cadmus, the founder of Thebes, was said to have been the son of its king Agenor.] in Bœotia.

(20.) In the rear of this spot begins the chain of Libanus, which extends 1500 stadia, as far as Simyra; this district has the name of Cœle Syria. Opposite to this chain, and separated from it by an intervening valley, stretches away the range of Antilibanus, which was formerly connected with Libanus [The Lebanon of Scripture. This intervening space, the ancient Cœle-Syria, is now inhabited by the Druses.] by a wall. Beyond it, and lying in the interior, is the region of Decapolis, and, with it, the Tetrarchies already mentioned, and the whole expanse of Palæstina. On the coast, again, and lying beneath Libanus, is the river Magoras [Perhaps the modern Nahr-el-Damur.], the colony of Berytus [Now Beyrout. By some it has been identified with the Berotha, or Berothai, of the Hebrew Scriptures. Its full name as a Roman colony was, “Colonia Julia Augusta Felix Berytus.” It was colonized by the veterans of the Fifth, or Macedonian, and the Eighth, or Augustan, Legions. Beyrout, or Berut, is now, in a commercial point of view, the most important place in Syria.], which bears the name of Felix Julia, the town of Leontos [Nothing is known of this place. The name seems to mean, the “Town of the Lion.”], the river Lycos [Now the Nahr-el-Kelb, or “Dog’s River.”], Palæbyblos [The site of this place seems not to be known.], the river Adonis [Now the Nahr-el-Ibrahim.], and the towns of Byblos [The modern town which stands on its site is called Jebeil. It is situate at the foot of Lebanon. The ancient name seems to have been Gebal, and the Geblites are mentioned in Joshua, xiii. 5; 1 Kings, v. 18; and Ezek. xxvii. 9. The ruins of the ancient city are very extensive. Astarte and Isis seem to have been worshipped here.], Botrys [Now Batrun, a small town about twelve miles north of Byblus, said to have been founded by Ithobal, king of Tyre.], Gigarta [Now Gazir, according to D’Anville.], Trieris [Twelve miles from Tripolis. Its name would seem to bear reference to a trireme, or galley. It has been said that this is the place referred to in the Book of Daniel, xi. 30.], Calamos [Polybius speaks of this place as being burnt by Antiochus. Its site still bears the name of Calamon, according to D’Anville.], Tripolis [This properly consisted of three distinct cities, 600 feet apart, each with its own walls, but all connected in a common constitution; having one place of assembly, and forming in reality one city only. They were colonies, as here suggested by Pliny, of Tyre, Sidon, and Arados respectively. It is still a considerable place, called Tarabolos, or Tarablis, by the Turks.], inhabited by the Tyrians, Sidonians, and Aradians; Orthosia [Its site is still known as Ortosa, or Tortosa.], the river Eleutheros [Probably the same as the Nahr-el-Kebir, or “Great River,” to the north of Tripolis. It may have derived its Greek name, which signifies “free,” from its similarity to that given to it by the people of the country.], the towns of Simyra and Marathos [This was an important city, near Antarados. Its ruins are spoken of as very extensive. Simyra is still called Sumira.]; and opposite, Arados [Now called Ruad; an island off the northern coast of Phœnicia, at a distance of twenty stadia from the mainland, Pliny falling short here in his measurement. The city of Arados was very populous, though built on a mere rock; and, contrary to Eastern custom, the houses contained many stories. It is spoken of by the prophet Ezekiel under the name of Arvad: see c. xxvii. 8, 11. In importance, it ranked next to the cities of Tyre and Sidon.], a town seven stadia long, on an island, distant 200 paces from the mainland. After passing through the country in which the before-named mountains end and the plains that lie between, Mount Bargylus [Its modern name does not appear to be known.] is seen to rise.

### Chap. 18.—Syria Antiochia.

Here Phœnicia ends, and Syria recommences. The towns are, Carne [Also called Antarados, as lying nearly opposite to the city of Arados. According to Strabo, the port of Antarados was called Carne, or Carnos. In the time of the Crusades, it was known under the name of Tortosa. Its present name is Tartus.], Balanea [Now Banias. It was situate twenty-four miles north of Antarados. Its name is supposed to have originated in the baths in its vicinity. The site is deserted; but a few ruins of the ancient town are still to be seen.], Paltos [Eight miles from Balanea. Its ruins are known by the name of Boldo.], and Gabale [Its site is now known as Djebeleh, a small village in the vicinity of Laodicea, or Latakia. The sun was probably worshipped here, and hence the Emperor Heliogabalus derived his name.]; then the promontory upon which is situate the free town of Laodicea [About fifty miles south of Antioch, now called Ladikiyeh, or Latakia, noted for the excellence of its tobacco, which has an European reputation. It was built by Seleucus I., on the site of an earlier city, called Ramitha. It was afterwards greatly favoured by Julius Cæsar. Herod the Great built an aqueduct here, the ruins of which are still in existence. It is now a poor Turkish village; but there are considerable remains of the ancient city to be seen in its vicinity.]; and then Diospolis [It has been suggested, that Pliny means the city of Lydda, in the tribe of Benjamin, which of course would be very much to the south, and quite out of the order in which he is proceeding. If that is not the place meant, this Diospolis is utterly unknown.], Heraclea [At some miles’ distance to the north of Laodicea. Pococke found some traces of its site at a spot called Minta Baurdeleh, or the Bay of the Tower.], Charadrus [Pliny is in error here most probably, and is speaking of a place as being in Syria which in reality was in Cilicia, between Platanus and Cragus. The name implies its situation near a mountain torrent.], and Posidium [On a small bay, some miles north of Heraclea.].

(21.) We then come to the Promontory of Syria Antiochia. In the interior is the free city of Antiochia [Or Antioch, the capital of the Greek kings of Syria, and the most famous of the sixteen cities built by Seleucus Nicator, and called after the name of his father, (or son, as some say,) Antiochus. It was built on the Orontes, and formed one of the most beautiful and pleasant cities of the ancient world. The modern Antakieh is a poor town, built on the north-western part of the site of the ancient city, by the river. The walls, built by Justinian, may still be traced for a circuit of four miles. Here the followers of our Saviour first obtained the name of “Christians.”] itself, surnamed Epidaphnes [That is, “Near Daphne,” there being a celebrated grove of that name, consecrated to Apollo, in its immediate vicinity.], and divided by the river Orontes [Now called the Nahr-el-Asy.]. On the promontory is Seleucia [Now Seleuca, or Kepse, at the foot of Mount Pieria. It has been referred to in a previous note.], called Pieria, a free city.

(22.) Beyond it lies Mount Casius [Now known as Djebel-el-Akra.], a different one from the mountain of the same name [In the extreme north-east of Egypt. See pp. 422 and 424.] which we have already mentioned. The height of this mountain is so vast, that, at the fourth watch [The beginning of the fourth watch was three o’clock in the morning. The height of this mountain does not in reality appear to be anything remarkable, and has been ascertained to be but 5318 feet. There is probably no foundation for the marvellous story here told by Pliny; nevertheless, we are told by Spartianus, that the Emperor Adrian passed a night upon the mountain, for the purpose of seeing this extraordinary sight; but a storm arising, it prevented the gratification of his curiosity. It lay near Nymphæum and Seleucia, and its base was washed by the waters of the Orontes.] of the night, you can see from it, in the midst of the darkness, the sun rising on the east; and thus, by merely turning round, we may at one and the same time behold both day and night. The winding road which leads to its summit is nineteen miles in length, its perpendicular height four. Upon this coast there is the river Orontes, which takes its rise near Heliopolis [Or Baalbec, in the interior of Syria.], between the range of Libanus and Antilibanus. The towns are, Rhosos [According to Ansart, it still retains that name.], and, behind it, the Gates of Syria [Now called Bylan. This was the name of the narrow pass between a portion of Mount Taurus and the Rock of Rossicum. According to Ansart, the spot is called at the present day Saggal Doutan.], lying in the space between the chain of the Rhosian mountains and that of Taurus. On the coast there is the town of Myriandros [This was a Phœnician colony, on the eastern side of the Gulf of Issus; it is said by Ansart still to retain its ancient name.], and Mount Amanus [Now called Alma-Dagh, a branch of Mount Taurus, running from the head of the Gulf of Issus, north-east, to the principal chain, and dividing Syria from Cilicia and Cappadocia. There were two passes in it, the Syrian Gates and the Amanian Gates. It is often spoken of by Cicero, who was the Roman governor of Cilicia.], upon which is the town of Bomitæ [The locality of this place is unknown, as Pliny is the only author who mentions it.]. This mountain separates Cilicia from Syria.
