---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 55-91."
chapter_order: 193
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 55.—Two Varieties of Filix or Fern, Known to the Greeks as Pteris, or Blachnon, and as Thelypteris, or Nymphæ Pteris: Eleven Remedies.

Of fern there are two varieties, equally destitute of blossom and of seed. [From this remark, Fée is of opinion that he had in view more particularly the Pteris aquilina and the Blechnum spicatum of Linnæus, plants in which the seed is not easily detected.] The Greeks give the name of “pteris,” and sometimes “blachnon,” to the kind [Identified by Fée with the Polypodium filix mas of Linnæus, the Male fern.] in which numerous shoots take their rise from a single root, exceeding two cubits even in length, and with a not unpleasant smell: [Dioscorides says it has a somewhat unpleasant smell, and this is nearer the truth.] this plant is thought to be the male fern.

The other kind is known to the Greeks as “thelypteris,” [“Female fern.” Identified by Fée with the Polypodium filix fæmina of Linnæus, Female fern or Pteris aquilina.] and sometimes, “nymphæa pteris:” it has a single stem only, with comparatively few branches, is shorter, softer, and more tufted than the other, and has channelled leaves growing near the root. Swine are fattened upon the roots of either kind. The leaves of both kinds are arranged on either side in the form of wings, whence the Greek name “pteris.” The roots are long, run obliquely, and are of a swarthy colour, more particularly when dried: when wanted for use, they should be dried in the sun. These plants are found growing everywhere, but in cold soils more particularly; they should be taken up, too, at the setting of the Vergiliæ. [See B. xviii. c. 59.] The root is only used at the end of three years, neither before that period nor after. They act as an expellent of intestinal worms; for tapeworm [Fée remarks that root of fern is an undoubted remedy for tapeworm, and that it is worthy of remark that we owe to the ancients the two most efficient anthelmintics known, fern-root, namely, and pomegranate rind.] honey is taken with them, but in other cases sweet wine, for three days.

They are, both of them, extremely detrimental to the stomach, but are laxative to the bowels, carrying off first the bile and then the aqueous humours of the body. When used for tapeworm, it is the best plan to take scammony with them, in equal proportions. For rheumatic defluxions, the root is taken in doses of two oboli, in water, after a day’s abstinence from food, a little honey being taken first. Neither kind must ever be given to females; for in pregnancy they are productive of abortion, and in other cases entail sterility. Powdered fern is sprinkled upon sordid ulcers, as also upon the necks of beasts of burden, when chafed. Fern-leaves kill bugs, and serpents will never harbour among them: hence it is a good plan to strew them in places where the presence of those reptiles is suspected. The very smell, too, of burnt fern will put serpents to flight. Medical men have made this distinction as to ferns; that of Macedonia, they say, is the best, and that of Cassiope the next.

### Chap. 56.—Femur Bubulum, or Ox Thigh.

The name of femur bubulum [The Femur bubulum has not been identified. C. Bauhin has suggested the Leonurus cardiaca of Linnæus, Motherwort.] is given to a plant which is good for the sinews, applied fresh, and beaten up with salt and vinegar.

### Chap. 57.—Galeopsis, Galeobdolon, or Galion: Six Remedies.

Galeopsis, [It has been suggested that this plant is the same as the Lamium, mentioned in B. xxii. c. 16, but Fée is not of that opinion. He identifies the Galeopsis with the Lamium purpureum of Linnæus, the Purple arch-angel, or dead-nettle. Littré gives as its synonym the Scrofularia peregrina of Linnæus, the Foreign figwort.] or as some call it, “galeobdolon” or “galion,” is a plant with a stem and leaves like those of the nettle, only smaller; and which, when bruised, emit a powerful smell. The flower is purple, and the plant is found growing everywhere, about hedges and foot-paths. The leaves and stems, bruised in vinegar, and applied topically, are curative of indurations, carcinomata, and scrofulous sores. They disperse also inflammatory tumours and imposthumes of the parotid glands, and it is found a useful plan to foment the parts affected with a decoction of them. Applied with salt, this plant is curative of putrid ulcers and gangrenous sores.

### Chap. 58.—The Glaux: One Remedy.

The glaux [Fée thinks that it may possibly be the Astragalus glaux of Linnæus, or Milk vetch, as originally suggested by Clusius. Littré gives as its synonym the Sennebierra coronopus of Poireau.] was known in ancient times as the “eugalacton.” [The “Good milk” plant.] In the leaves it resembles the cytisus and the lentil, only that they are whiter beneath. The branches, five or six in number, are extremely thin, and, springing from the root, creep upon the ground, with small purple blossoms upon them. This plant is found in localities near the sea. It is boiled in a pottage made of similago, [See B. xviii. cc. 19, 20.] to increase the milk: females, however, after taking it, must immediately use the bath.

### Chap. 59. (10.)—Glaucion: Three Remedies. Diaglaucia: Two Remedies.

Glaucion [See B. xx. c. 78, where a similar plant is mentioned. Fée identifies this plant with the Glaucium hybridum, or Chelidonium of Linnæus, the Violet-coloured celandine, or horned poppy. Littré gives the Glaucium flavum of Linnæus as its synonym.] grows in Syria and Parthia; it is a plant of stunted growth, and thickly covered with leaves, like those of the poppy in appearance, only smaller and of a more repulsive aspect: it has an offensive smell, and a bitter, astringent taste. The seed, which is of a saffron colour, is put into a vessel coated with potter’s clay, and heated in an oven; when taken out, a juice [This is a yellow, acrid, caustic juice; it is no longer used in medicine.] is extracted, which is known by the same name as the plant. This juice and the leaves, bruised, are used for defluxions of the eyes, which disappear in an instant, under this treatment: an eye-salve, too, is prepared from the juice, known as “diaglaucia,” to medical men. The milk, when the secretion of it is stopped, is restored by the agency of this plant, for which purpose it is taken in water.

### Chap. 60.—The Glycyside, Pæonia, or Pentoboros: Twenty Remedies.

The glycyside, [The Peony; described in B. xxv. c. 10.] by some called “pæonia” or “pentorobos,” has a stem two cubits in length, accompanied by two or three others, and of a reddish colour, with a bark like that of the laurel. The leaves are similar to those of isatis, [See B. xx. c. 25, and B. xxii. c. 2.] but more unctuous, rounder, and more diminutive; the seed is enclosed in capsules, some being red and some black, there being two varieties of the plant. The female plant is generally thought to be the one to the root of which some six or eight bulbs are attached, of an elongated form; those of the male plant [See B. xxv. c. 10.] being more in number, as it throws out more roots than one, a palm in length, and of a white colour: it has also an astringent taste. The leaves of the female plant smell like myrrh, [In reality it is destitute of smell.] and lie closer together than those of the male.

Both plants grow in the woods, and they should always be taken up at night, [See B. xxv. c. 10.] it is said; as it would be dangerous to do so in the day-time, the woodpecker of Mars being sure to attack the eyes [Or, as Holland says, would “be ready to job out their eyes.”] of the person so engaged. It is stated also that the person, while taking up the root, runs great risk of being attacked with procidence of the anus: all this, however, I take to be so much fiction, most frivolously invented to puff off their supposed marvellous properties. Both plants are used [In reality, the peony has no medicinal virtues whatever.] for various purposes: the red seed, taken in red wine, about fifteen in number, arrest menstruation; while the black seed, taken in the same proportion, in either raisin or other wine, are curative of diseases of the uterus. The root, taken in wine, allays all kinds of pains in the bowels, and acts as a purgative; it cures opisthotony also, jaundice, nephritic diseases, and affections of the bladder. Boiled in wine, it is used for diseases of the trachea and stomach, and acts astringently upon the bowels. It is eaten also by beasts of burden, but when wanted for remedial purposes, four drachmæ are sufficient.

The black seed is useful as a preventive of night-mare, [“Suppressionibus nocturnis”.] being taken in wine, in number above stated: it is very good, too, to eat this seed, and to apply it externally, for gnawing pains of the stomach. Suppurations are also dispersed, when recent, with the black seed, and when of long standing, with the red: both kinds are very useful, too, for wounds inflicted by serpents, and in cases where children are troubled with calculi, being employed at the crisis when strangury first makes its appearance.

### Chap. 61.—Gnaphalium or Chamæzelon: Six Remedies.

Gnaphalium [Sprengel identifies it with the Santolina maritima, Sea cudwort or cotton-weed. Fée considers its identification as doubtful.] is called “chamæzelon” by some: its white, soft, leaves are used as flock, and, indeed, there is no perceptible difference. This plant is administered in astringent wine, for dysentery: it arrests looseness of the bowels and the catamenia, and is used as an injection for tenesmus. It is employed topically for putrid sores.

### Chap. 62.—The Gallidraga: One Remedy.

Xenocrates gives the name of “gallidraga” [Identified by Hardouin and Desfontaines with the Dipsacus pilosus of Linnæus, the Shepherd’s rod, or small white teasel. Fée is doubtful on the subject] to a plant which resembles the leucacanthus, [See B. xxii. c. 18.] and grows in the marshes. It is a prickly plant, with a tall, ferulaceous stem, surmounted with a head somewhat similar to an egg in appearance. When this head is growing, in summer, small worms, [See B. xxv. c. 28.] he says, are generated, which are put away in a box for keeping, and are attached as an amulet, with bread, to the arm on the side on which tooth-ache is felt; indeed it is quite wonderful, he says, how soon the pain is removed. These worms, however, are of no use after the end of a year, or in cases where they have been allowed to touch the ground.

### Chap. 63.—Holcus or Aristis.

Holcus [Identified with the Hordeum murinum of Linnæus, and the same, most probably, as the Mouse barley of B. xxii. c. 65.] is a plant that grows in arid, stony, spots: it has an ear at the end of a fine stem, and looks like barley that has put forth again when cut. Attached to the head or around the arm, it extracts [Whence its name, from the Greek ἕλκω, “to draw.”] spikes of corn adhering to the flesh; for which reason, some persons give it the name of “aristis.”

### Chap. 64.—Hyoseris: One Remedy.

Hyoseris [“Swine’s endive.” It is generally identified with the Centaurea nigra of Linnæus; though, as Fée says, on very insufficient grounds, as the black centaury has but little similarity to endive.] resembles endive in appearance, but is a smaller plant, and rougher to the touch: pounded and applied to wounds, it heals them with remarkable rapidity.

### Chap. 65.—The Holosteon: Three Remedies.

The holosteon, [The “all-bone” plant. Desfontaines identifies it with the Plantago coronopus of Linnæus, the Buckshorn plantain; but Fée prefers the Plantago holostea of Lamarck, the Grass-leaved plantain. Littré names the Holosteum umbellatum. The Plantago albicans of Linnæus has been also mentioned.] so called by the Greeks by way of antiphrasis, [Because there is no hardness in it.] (in the same way that they give the name of “sweet” [Τὰ γλύκεα.] to the gall,) is a plant destitute of all hardness, of such extreme fineness as to resemble hairs in appearance, four fingers in length, and very similar to hay-grass. The leaves of it are narrow, and it has a rough flavour: it grows upon elevated spots composed of humus. Taken in wine, it is used for ruptures and convulsions. It has the property, also, of closing wounds; indeed, if applied to pieces of meat it will solder them together.

### Chap. 66.—The Hippophæston: Eight Remedies.

The hippophæston is one of those prickly plants which fullers [See B. xxiv. c. 68. In B. xvi. c. 92, Fée identifies this plant with the Calcitrapa stellata of Lamarck. He also suggests that it may possibly be the second “Hippophaes,” mentioned in B. xxii. c. 14. Desfontaines identifies it with the Cnicus stellatus, the Star-thistle. Littré gives as its synonym the Centaurea spinosa, Prickly centaury; in accordance with the opinion of M. Fraäs, who admits, however, that the statement that it has neither stem nor flower, would hardly seem to indicate a species of centaury.] use in their coppers; it has neither stem nor flower, but only diminutive, empty heads, numerous small leaves of a grass-green colour, and small, soft, white roots. From these roots a juice is extracted in summer, which, taken in doses of three oboli, acts as a purgative; being used for this purpose in cases of epilepsy, fits of trembling, dropsy, vertigo, hardness of breathing, and incipient paralysis.

### Chap. 67. (11.)—The Hypoglossa: One Remedy.

The hypoglossa [The Ruscus hypoglossum of Linnæus, the Double tongue.] is a plant with leaves like those of the wild myrtle, of a concave form, prickly, and presenting another small leaf within, resembling a tongue in shape. A wreath made of these leaves, placed upon the head, alleviates headache.

### Chap. 68.—Hypecoön.

Hypecoön [The Hypecoüm procumbens of Linnæus, Horned cummin.] is a plant found growing in corn-fields, with leaves like those of rue. Its properties are similar to those of juice of poppies.

### Chap. 69.—The Idæa Herba, or Plant of Ida: Four Remedies.

The Idæan [Fée thinks that “Idæa herba,” “plant of Ida,” may possibly be one of the synonyms of the Alexandrian laurel. See B. xv. c. 39. Should that identity not hold good, he prefers the Uvularia amplexifolia of Linnæus.] plant has leaves like those of the oxymyrsine; [See B. xv. cc. 7, 37, and B. xxiii. c. 83.] to which leaves a sort of tendril adheres, that bears a flower. This plant arrests diarrhœa, the catamenia, when in excess, and all kinds of hæmorrhage. It is of an astringent and repercussive nature.

### Chap. 70.—The Isopyron or Phasiolon: Two Remedies.

The isopyron [Fée suggests the Corydalis claviculata of Decandolle. Littré mentions the Fumaria capreolata of Linnæus.] is called “phasiolon” by some, from the circumstance that the leaf of it, which resembles that of anise, assumes a spiral form like the tendrils of the phasiolus. [Or kidney-bean. See B. xxiv. c. 40.] At the summit of the stem, it bears small heads full of a seed like that of melanthium. [Or Gith. See B. xx. c. 71.] These heads, taken with honey or hydromel, are good for cough and other affections of the chest; they are extremely useful also for liver complaints.

### Chap. 71.—The Lathyris: Two Remedies.

The lathyris [The Euphorbia lathyris of Linnæus, the Caper plant, or Caper spurge.] has numerous leaves like those of the lettuce, [There is no such resemblance, except that they both contain a milky juice, the properties of which are, however, very different. It is a plant of an energetic and even dangerous nature, and must never be mistaken for the real caper.] with numbers of small buds, in which the seed is contained, enclosed in envelopes like that of the caper. When these buds are dry, the seeds, about the size of a peppercorn, are taken out: they are white, sweet, and easily cleansed from the husk. Twenty of them, taken in pure water or in hydromel, are curative of dropsy, and carry off bile. Persons who require a stronger purgative, take them with the husks on. They are apt, however, to be injurious to the stomach; for which reason a plan has been adopted of taking them with fish or else chicken broth.

### Chap. 72.—The Leontopetalon or Pardalion: Two Remedies.

The leontopetalon [Mostly thought to be the same plant as the Leontopodium of B. xxvi. c. 34. Littré, however, identifies it with the Evax pygmæus of Linnæus.] is called “pardalion” by some: it has a leaf like that of the cabbage, and a stem half a foot in height, with numerous lateral branches, and a seed at the extremities of them, enclosed in pods like those of the chick-pea. The root resembles that of rape, and is large and black: it grows in plough lands. The root, taken in wine, neutralizes the venom of all kinds of serpents; indeed, there is nothing known that is more speedily efficacious for that purpose. It is given also for sciatica.

### Chap. 73.—The Lycapsos: Two Remedies.

The lycapsos [Probably the Echium Italicum of Linnæus, Italian viper’s tongue.] has longer and thicker leaves than those of the lettuce, [There is no resemblance between the Echium and the lettuce.] and a long, hairy stem, with numerous offshoots a cubit in length; the flower is diminutive, and of a purple colour; it grows in champaign localities. In combination with barley-meal, it is used as an application for erysipelas: the juice of it, mixed with warm water, is employed as a sudorific, in fevers.

### Chap. 74.—The Lithospermum, Exonychon, Diospyron, or Heracleos: Two Remedies.

Among all the plants, however, there is none of a more marvellous nature than the lithospermum, [Identified by Fée and Desfontaines with the Lithospermum officinale of Linnæus, Gremil, gromwell, or stone-crop. Littré mentions the Lithospermum tenuiflorum of Linnæus.] sometimes called “exonychon,” “diospyron,” [“Jove’s wheat,” or the “plant of Hercules.”] or “heracleos.” It is about five inches in height, with leaves twice the size of those of rue, and small ligneous branches, about the thickness of a rush. It bears close to the leaves a sort of fine beard or spike, standing by itself, on the extremity of which there are small white stones, as round as a pearl, about the size of a chick-pea, and as hard as a pebble. These stones, [This description applies to the variety of Gremil, known as the Coix lacryma of Linnæus, Job’s tears, originally an Indian plant; but it may have been known in Italy in Pliny’s time.] at the part where they adhere to the stalk, have a small cavity, and contain a seed within.

This plant is found in Italy, no doubt, but that of Crete is the most esteemed. Among all the plants, there is none that I ever contemplated with greater admiration than this; so beauteous is the conformation, that it might be fancied that the hand of an artist [A poor compliment to Nature, as Fée remarks.] had arranged a row of lustrous pearls alternately among the leaves; so exquisite too the nicety in thus making a stone to grow upon a plant! The authorities say that this is a creeping plant, and that it lies upon the ground; but for my own part, I have only seen it when plucked, and not while growing. It is well known that these small stones, taken in doses of one drachma, in white wine, break and expel urinary calculi, [It has in reality no medicinal properties to speak of; but its name, “stone seed,” and its appearance, would, of course, ensure its reputation as an efficient cure for calculus.] and are curative of strangury. Indeed, there is no plant that so instantaneously proclaims, at the mere sight of it, the medicinal purposes for which it was originally intended; the appearance of it, too, is such, that it can be immediately recognized, without the necessity of having recourse to any botanical authority.

### Chap. 75.—Lapidis Muscus, or Stone Moss: One Remedy.

There grows near running streams, a dry, white moss, [Some kind of lichen, probably, but what in particular it is impossible to say.] upon ordinary stones. One of these stones, with the addition of human saliva, is rubbed against another; after which the first stone is used for touching impetigo, [Ring-worm or tetter.] the party so doing uttering these words:—

### Chap. 76.—The Limeum: One Remedy.

Limeum [Anguillara and C. Bauhin identify it with the Ranunculus thora of Linnæus, and other authorities with the Doronicum pardalianches of Linnæus. Pliny is the only writer that mentions it; and if it really had any existence, it would seem quite impossible, as Fée says, to identify it with correctness.] is the name given by the Gauls to a plant, in a preparation of which, known to them as “deer’s [“Venenum cervarium.”] poison,” they dip their arrows [See B. xxv. c. 25.] when hunting. To three modii of salivating mixture [“Salivati.” Holland renders this, “A mash wherewith they used to drench cattle.”] they put as much of the plant as is used for poisoning a single arrow; and a mess of it is passed down the throat, in cases where oxen are suffering from disease, due care being taken to keep them fastened to the manger till they have been purged, as they are generally rendered frantic by the dose. In case perspiration supervenes, they are drenched all over with cold water.

### Chap. 77.—The Leuce, Mesoleucon, or Leucas: Three Remedies.

Leuce, [Identified with the Lamium of B. xxii. c. 16.] a plant resembling mercurialis, [See B. xxv. c. 18. The resemblance, Fée says, is by no means a striking one.] has received its name [The “white” plant.] from the circumstance that a white line runs through the middle of the leaf; for which reason also, some give it the name of “mesoleucon.” [“White in the middle.”] The juice of this plant is curative of fistula, and the plant itself, bruised, is good for carcinomata. It is probably the same plant as that called “leucas,” so remarkably efficacious for the venom of all kinds of marine animals. Authors have not given a description of it, beyond telling us that the wild leucas has larger leaves than the other, and has properties more strongly developed: they state also that the seed of the cultivated kind is the more acrid of the two.

### Chap. 78.—The Leucographis: Five Remedies.

I have not found a description given by any writer of the leucographis; [Identified by Fée with the Cerinthe of B. xxi. c. 41. Sprengel, however, considers it to be the Carduus leucographus of Linnæus.] a thing I am the more surprised at, as they tell us that it is good for the cure of spitting of blood, taken in doses of three oboli with saffron; as also that it is useful for cœliac affections, applied beaten up in water, and in cases of excessive menstruation. They state also that it enters into the composition of ophthalmic preparations, and that it fills up ulcers on the more tender parts of the body with new flesh.

### Chap. 79. (12.)—The Medion: Three Remedies.

The medion [Fée identifies it with the Campanula Medium of Linnæus, our Canterbury or Coventry bells; but this flower is blue, while the colour of the Medion is purple. Littré gives the Convolvulus althæoides of Linnæus. Sibthorp has named the Campanula laciniata; and other authorities the Michauxia campanuloïdes.] has leaves like those of the cultivated seris, [See B. xx. c. 32.] a stem three feet in length, and a large, round, purple flower, at its extremity. The seed is diminutive, and the root half a foot in length: it grows upon umbrageous, sheltered rocks. The root, taken in doses of two drachmæ with honey, arrests the catamenia, the electuary being used for some days. The seed, too, is administered in wine for a similar purpose.

### Chap. 80.—The Myosota or Myosotis: Three Remedies.

The myosota [“Mouse-ears.” Fée identifies it with the Myosotis Scorpioïdes of Linnæus, Scorpion-grass, or mouse-ear, which is not of a corrosive nature, as Pliny says, but emollient and soothing. Littré names the Asperugo procumbens of Linnæus, Wild bugloss, German madwort, or great goose-grass.] or myosotis is a smooth plant, throwing out from a single root numerous hollowed stems, of a somewhat reddish colour; and bearing at the lower extremities swarthy, narrow, oblong leaves, sharp on the back, arranged in pairs at regular distances, and springing from delicate branches attached with axils to the main stems. The flower is blue, and the root, a finger in length, is provided with numerous filaments like hairs. This plant possesses certain septic and ulcerating properties, and hence is used for the cure of fistula of the eye. The Egyptians say that if upon the morning of the twenty-eight day of their month Thoth, a day which generally falls in our month of August, a person rubs himself with the juice of this plant before speaking to any one, he will be sure to have no diseases of the eyes all that year.

### Chap. 81.—The Myagros: One Remedy.

The myagros [Sprengel identifies it with the Alyssum sativum, the Garden madwort; Fée with the Camelina sativa of Crantz, the Cultivated cameline. Littré gives the Neslia paniculata as its synonym.] is a ferulaceous plant, with leaves like those of madder: the seed is of an oily nature—indeed, an oil is extracted from it. Ulcerations of the mouth are cured by rubbing them with the juice of this plant.

### Chap. 82.—The Nyma: One Remedy.

The plant called “nyma” [Or “Nigina,” in some editions. It is utterly unknown.] bears three long leaves, like those of endive: applied to scars, it restores the skin to its natural colour.

### Chap. 83.—The Natrix: One Remedy.

“Natrix” [Possibly a fabulous plant; though it is generally identified with the Ononis natrix of Linnæus. Poinsinet de Sivry derives its name from the Celto-Germanic words, nat, “night,” and ris, “wand;” a name given to it, according to him, for its efficacy in dispelling the illusions of the night.] is the name of a plant, the root of which, when taken out of the ground, has just the rank smell of the he-goat. It is used in Picenum for the purpose of keeping away from females what with a singular credulity they call by the name of “Fatui.” [Or “Fauni,” the same as our nightmare.] For my own part, however, I should think that persons requiring to be treated with such medicaments as these, must be labouring under a sort of mental hallucination.

### Chap. 84.—Odontitis: One Remedy.

Odontitis [Probably the Euphrasia odontites of Linnæus, the Red eye-bright.] is a sort of hay-grass, [“Inter feni genera.”] which throws out from a single root numerous, small, jointed stems, of a triangular form and of a swarthy hue. At the joints there are small leaves, somewhat longer than those of the polygonos; [See c. 91 of this Book. There is no resemblance between them.] and in the axils formed by these leaves is the seed, similar to barley in appearance. It has a purple, diminutive flower, and is found growing in meadows. [On the contrary, it grows in arid, sterile spots.] A handful of the stems, boiled in astringent wine, is used for the cure of tooth-ache, [Hence its name “odontitis,” “tooth-wort.”] the decoction being retained for some time in the mouth.

### Chap. 85.—The Othonna: One Remedy.

The othonna [Its synonym is unknown. Sprengel has identified it with the Tagetes patula of Linnæus, but that is purely an American plant!] is a Syrian plant, resembling rocket in appearance; its leaves are pierced with numerous holes, and its flower resembles that of saffron, for which reason some persons have given it the name of “anemone.” The juice of this plant is employed in ophthalmic preparations; it is slightly pungent, of a warming nature, and astringent as it dries. It acts as a detergent upon cicatrizations, films on the eyes, and all impediments of the sight. Some say that the plant is washed and dried, and then divided into lozenges.

### Chap. 86.—The Onosma: One Property.

The onosma [Probably one of the Borragineæ, Fée thinks, but beyond that he considers it impossible to say. Desfontaines identifies it with the Onosma echioides of Linnæus, the Hairy onosma.] has leaves some four fingers in length, lying upon the ground, and indented like those of the anchusa: [See B. xxii. c. 23.] it has neither [If it is the plant above-mentioned, this is incorrect.] stem, blossom, nor seed. A pregnant woman, they say, if she eats of this plant, or even walks over it, will be sure to miscarry.

### Chap. 87.—The Onopordon: Five Remedies.

The onopordon, [Fée suggests that it may be identical with the Onopyxos of B. xxi. c. 56. Desfontaines, also, identifies it with the Onopordon acanthium of Linnæus, the Cotton thistle or woolly thistle.] it is said, has strongly carminative effects upon asses, when they eat of it. It acts as a diuretic and as an emmenagogue, arrests diarrhœa, and disperses abscesses and suppurations.

### Chap. 88.—The Osyris: Four Remedies.

The osyris [Probably the Osyris alba of Linnæus, the Poet’s cassia. Anguillara and Dodonæus have mentioned the Chenopodium scoparia of Linnæus, the Summer cypress, or line-leaved goosefoot, but without any good reason, it is thought. Holland calls it “toad-flax.”] bears small, swarthy, flexible branches, covered with dark leaves like those of flax. The seed, which grows upon the branches, is black at first, but afterwards changes its colour and turns red. Cosmetics [“Smegmata.”] for females are prepared from these branches. A decoction of the roots, taken in drink, is curative of jaundice. The roots, cut in pieces before the seed ripens, and dried in the sun, act astringently upon the bowels: gathered after the seed has ripened, and boiled in pottage, they are curative of defluxions of the abdomen: they are taken also by themselves, bruised in rain water.

### Chap. 89.—The Oxys: Two Remedies.

The oxys [The “sour” plant. Mostly identified with the Oxalis acetosella of Linnæus, Cuckoo’s meat, three leaved sorrel, or wood-sorrel.] is a plant with three leaves; it is given for derangement of the stomach, and patients eat it who are suffering from intestinal hernia. [“Enterocele.”]

### Chap. 90.—The Polyanthemum or Ratrachion: Three Remedies.

The polyanthemum, [The “many-flowered” plant. Probably the Ranunculus polyanthemos of Linnæus. See B. xxv. c. 109.] by some persons called “batrachion,” [The “frog” plant.] by virtue of its caustic properties has an excoriating effect upon scars, and restores the skin to its proper colour. It heals white morphew [“Vitiligines”.] also.

### Chap. 91.—The Polygonos, Polygonatos, Teuthalis, Carcinethron, Clema, or Myrtopetalos, Otherwise Known as Sanguinaria or Orios: Four Varieties of It: Forty Remedies.

The Greeks give the name of “polygonos” [“Many-seeded.”] to the plant known to us as “sanguinaria.” [“Blood plant.”] It is but little elevated above the ground, has leaves like those of rue, and resembles grass in appearance. The juice of it, injected into the nostrils, arrests hæmorrhage: taken with wine, it has a similar effect upon bleeding at any other part of the body, as also spitting of blood. Those who distinguish several kinds of polygonos, make this to be the male [Identified by Fée with the Polygonum aviculare of Linnæus, the Knot-grass.] plant, and say that it is so called from the large number of seeds, or else from its numerous branches. Some call it “polygonatos,” [“Many-knotted.” Scribonius says that it received its name, “polygonos,” from its being found everywhere.] from the number of its joints, others, again, “teuthalis,” and others, “carcinethron,” “clema,” or “myrtopetalos.”

There are some authorities to be found, however, who say that this is the female plant, and that the male is more diminutive, less swarthy, and more jointed, with a seed protruding beneath all the leaves. However this may be, these plants are of an astringent, cooling nature. The seed is laxative, and, taken in large doses, acts as a diuretic, and arrests defluxions; indeed, if there is no defluxion, it is of no use taking it. For burning heats of the stomach, the leaves are applied topically; and they are used, in the form of a liniment, for pains in the bladder, and for erysipelas. The juice is used as an injection for suppurations of the ears, and by itself, for pains in the eyes. It is administered, also, in fevers, tertian and quartan fevers more particularly, in doses of two cyathi, just before the paroxysms come on; as also in cases of cholera, dysentery, and derangement of the stomach.

There is a third kind, which grows on the mountains, and is known as “orios,” [Or “mountain” plant. Fée considers it to be the same as the second kind above mentioned, and to correspond with the female Polygonos of Dioscorides. He identifies it with the Hippuris vulgaris of Linnæus, Mare’s tail, or female horse-tail; Littré gives the Equisetum pallidum of Bory as its synonym.] similar to a delicate reed in appearance, and having but a single stem, with numerous joints running into one another; the leaves of it are similar to those of the pitch-tree, and the root is never used. This variety, however, is not so efficacious as those already mentioned, and, indeed, is used exclusively for sciatica. A fourth kind is known as the wild [Identified by Fée with the Ephedra distachya of Linnæus, the Great shrubby horsetail.] polygonos: it is a shrub, almost a tree in fact, with a ligneous root, a red trunk like that of the cedar, and branches resembling those of spartum, [See B, xix. c. 7.] a couple of palms in length, and with three or four dark-coloured, knotted joints. This kind, also, is of an astringent nature, and has a flavour like that of the quince. It is either boiled down in water to one third, or else dried and powdered for sprinkling upon ulcerations of the mouth and excoriations: it is chewed, also, for affections of the gums. It arrests the progress of corrosive ulcers and of all sores of a serpiginous nature, or which cicatrize with difficulty, and is particularly useful for ulcerations caused by snow. Herbalists employ it also for quinzy, and use it as a chaplet for head-ache; for defluxions of the eyes, they put it round the neck.

In cases of tertian fever, some persons pull it up with the left hand, and attach it as an amulet to the body; the same, too, in cases of hæmorrhage. There is no plant that is more generally kept by them in a dry state than the polygonos.
