---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 21-25."
chapter_order: 23
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 21. (17.)—The Eleventh Region of Italy; Italia Transpadana.

From the river Padus the eleventh region receives its name of Transpadana; to which, situate as it is wholly in the interior, the river, by its bounteous channel, conveys the gifts of all the seas. The towns are Vibî Forum [This place is supposed to have been situate in the vicinity of the modern Saluzzo, on the north bank of the Po. Segusio occupied the site of the modern Susa.] and Segusio; and, at the foot of the Alps, the colony of Augusta Taurinorum [Augusta of the Taurini. The present city of Turin stands on its site. It was made a Roman colony by Augustus. With the exception of some inscriptions, Turin retains no vestiges of antiquity.], at which place the Padus becomes navigable, and which was founded by the ancient race of the Ligurians, and of Augusta Prætoria [The present city of Aosta occupies its site. This was also a Roman colony founded by Augustus, after he had subdued the Salassi. It was, as Pliny says in C., the extreme point of Italy to the north. The remains of the ancient city are of extreme magnificence.] of the Salassi, near the two passes of the Alps, the Grecian [The Grecian pass of the Alps was that now known as the Little St. Bernard; while the Penine pass was the present Great St. Bernard. Livy in his History, B. xxi. c. 38, points out the error of taking these mountains to have derived their name from the Pœni or Carthaginians. There is no doubt that they took their name from the Celtic word signifying a mountain, which now forms the “Pen” of the Welsh and the “Ben” of the Scotch.] and the Penine (by the latter it is said that the Carthaginians passed into Italy, by the Grecian, Hercules)—the town of Eporedia [Now called Ivrea or Lamporeggio, at the entrance of the valley of the Salassi, the present Val d’Aosta. There are some remains of the ancient town to be seen.], the foundation of which by the Roman people was enjoined by the Sibylline books; the Gauls call tamers of horses by the name of “Eporediæ”—Vercellæ [The present town of Vercelli stands on its site.], the town of the Libici, derived its origin from the Salluvii, and Novaria [Now called Novara, in the Duchy of Milan.], founded by the Vertacomacori, is at the present day a district of the Vocontii, and not, as Cato supposes, of the Ligurians; of whom two nations, called the Lævi and the Marici, founded Ticinum [It became a Roman municipal town, but owes its greatness to the Lombard kings who made it their capital, and altered the name to Papia, now Pavia.], not far from the Padus, as the Boii, descended from the Transalpine nations, have founded Laus Pompeia [“Pompey’s Praises.” The present Lodi Vecchio marks its site.] and the Insubres Mediolanum [It was the capital of the Insubres, a Gallic nation, and was taken by the Romans in B.C. 222, on which it became a municipium and Roman colony. On the division of the empire by Diocletian, it became the residence of his colleague Maximianus, and continued to be the abode of the Emperors of the West till it was plundered by Attila, who transferred the seat of government to Ravenna. It afterwards became the capital of the kingdom of the Ostro-Goths, and was again sacked by the Goths in A.D. 539, and its inhabitants put to the sword. The present city, known to us as Milan, contains no remains of antiquity.].

From Cato we also learn that Comum, Bergomum [The modern Como and Bergamo stand on their sites.], and Licinîforum [From its name, signifying the “market of Licinius,” it would appear to be of Roman origin. Its site is supposed to have been at a place called Incino, near the town of Erba, between Como and Lecco, where inscriptions and other antiquities have been found.], and some other peoples in the vicinity, originated with the Orobii, but he admits that he is ignorant as to the origin of that nation. Cornelius Alexander however informs us that they came from Greece, interpreting their name as meaning “those who live upon the mountains [Deriving it from the Greek ὄρος, “a mountain,” and βίος, “life.”].” In this district, Parra has disappeared, a town of the Orobii, from whom, according to Cato, the people of Bergomum are descended; its site even yet shows that it was situate in a position more elevated than fruitful [“Etiamnum prodente se altius quam fortunatius situm.” Hardouin seems to think that “se” refers to Cato, and that he informs us to that effect; but to all appearance, it relates rather to the town, which even yet, by its ruins, showed that it was perched too high among the mountains to be a fertile spot.]. The Caturiges have also perished, an exiled race of the Insubres, as also Spina previously mentioned; Melpum too, a place distinguished for its opulence, which, as we are informed by Cornelius Nepos, was destroyed by the Insubres, the Boii, and the Senones, on the very day on which Camillus took Veii.

### Chap. 22. (18.)—The Tenth Region of Italy.

We now come to the tenth region of Italy, situate on the Adriatic Sea. In this district are Venetia [The district of the Veneti. These people, taking refuge in the adjoining islands in the fifth century to escape the Huns under Attila, founded the modern city of Venice.], the river Silis [Now called the Sile, which flows past Trevigio or Treviso.], rising in the Tarvisanian [The mountainous district in the vicinity of Tarvisium, the modern Treviso.] mountains, the town of Altinum [Situate in a marsh or lagune on the river Sile. It became a Roman colony after Pliny’s time, under the Emperor Trajan. Its villas are described by Martial as rivalling those of Baiæ. The Emperor Verus died here A.D. 169. The modern village of Altino is a very impoverished place. The Liquentia is now called the Livenza.], the river Liquentia rising in the mountains of Opitergium [Now called Oderzo, on the river Montegano, which flows into the Liquenza. The conduct of the people of this place, in the wars between Pompey and Cæsar, is mentioned by Lucan, in his Pharsalia, B. iv. l. 462.], and a port with the same name, the colony of Concordia [From inscriptions we find that this place was called Colonia Julia Concordia, from which it seems probable that it was one of the colonies founded by Augustus to celebrate the restoration of peace. It rapidly rose into importance, and is often mentioned during the later ages of the Roman Empire, as one of the most important cities in this part of Italy. It is now a poor village, with the same name, and no remains of antiquity beyond a few inscriptions.]; the rivers and harbours of Romatinum [The Romatinum is the modern Lemene. Pliny seems to imply, (though from the uncertainty of the punctuation it is not clear,) that on the Romatinum there was a port of that name. If so, it would probably occupy the site of the present Santa Margherita, at the mouth of the Lemene.], the greater and less Tiliaventum [The greater Tiliaventum is the modern Tagliamento; and Hardouin suggests that the smaller river of that name is the Lugugnana.], the Anaxum [This river is supposed to be the same with the modern Stella, and the Varamus the Revonchi, which joins the Stella.], into which the Varamus flows, the Alsa [Now called the Ansa. The Natiso is the modern Natisone, and the Turrus the Torre; the former flowed past Aquileia on the west, the latter on the east, in former times, but their course is probably now changed, and they fall into the Isonzo, four miles from the city.], and the Natiso with the Turrus, which flow past the colony of Aquileia [The capital of Venetia, and one of the most important cities of Northern Italy. In the year A.D. 452 it was besieged by Attila, king of the Huns, taken by storm, and plundered and burnt to the ground. On its site, which is very unhealthy, is the modern village of Aquileia, with about 1400 inhabitants. No ruins of any buildings are visible, but the site abounds with coins, shafts of columns, inscriptions, and other remains of antiquity.] at a distance of fifteen miles from the sea. This is the country of the Carni [Ptolemy states that Concordia and Aquileia were situate in the district of the Carni.], and adjoining to it is that of the Iapydes, the river Timavus [Still called the Timavo.], the fortress of Pucinum [Castel Duino stands on its site. It will be found again mentioned in B. xiv. C. 8, for the excellence of its wines.], famous for its wines, the Gulf of Tergeste [Now the Gulf of Trieste. Tergeste was previously an insignificant place, but made a Roman colony by Vespasian. The modern city of Trieste occupies its site.], and the colony of that name, thirty-three miles from Aquileia. Six miles beyond this place lies the river Formio [Most probably the modern Risano. Cluver and D’Anville are of that opinion, but Walckenaer thinks that it was a small stream near Muja Yecchia; which seems however to be too near Trieste.], 189 miles distant from Ravenna, the ancient boundary [In the time of Augustus, and before Istria was added as a province to Italy.] of enlarged Italy, and now the frontier of Istria. That this region takes its name from the river Ister which flows from the Danube, also called the Ister, into the Adriatic opposite the mouth of the Padus, and that the sea which lies between them is rendered fresh by their waters running from opposite directions, has been erroneously asserted by many, and among them by Nepos even, who dwelt upon the banks of the Padus. For it is the fact that no river which runs from the Danube discharges itself into the Adriatic. They have been misled, I think, by the circumstance that the ship Argo came down some river into the Adriatic sea, not far from Tergeste; but what river that was is now unknown. The most careful writers say that the ship was carried across the Alps on men’s shoulders, having passed along the Ister, then along the Savus, and so from Nauportus [He alludes to an old tradition that the Argonauts sailed into the Ister or Danube, and then into the Save, till they came to the spot where the modern town of Upper Laybach stands, and that here they built Nauportus, after which they carried their ship across the mountains on men’s shoulders into the Adriatic. He intends to suggest therefore that the place had its name from the Greek ναῦς “a ship” and πορθμὸς “a passage.”], which place, lying between Æmona [The modern town of Laybach stands on its site. It is situate on the Save, and on the road from Aquileia to Celeia. The Roman remains prove that the ancient city exceeded the modern one in magnitude. According to tradition it was founded by the Argonauts. It subsequently became a Roman colony, with the title of Julia Augusta. It is again mentioned in C..] and the Alps, from that circumstance derives its name.

### Chap. 23. (19.)—Istria, Its People and Locality.

Istria projects in the form of a peninsula. Some writers have stated its length to be forty miles, and its circumference 125; and the same as to Liburnia which adjoins it, and the Flanatic Gulf [Now the Golfo di Quarnaro. Liburnia was separated from Istria on the north-west by the river Arsia, and from Dalmatia on the south by the river Titus or Kerka, corresponding to the western part of modern Croatia, and the northern part of modern Dalmatia. Iapydia was situate to the north of Dalmatia and east of Liburnia, or the present military frontier of Croatia, between the rivers Kulpa and Korana to the north and east, and the Velebich mountains to the south. Istria consisted of the peninsula which still bears the same appellation.], while others make it 225 [This passage, “while others make it 225,” is omitted in many of the MSS. and most of the editions. If it is retained, it is not improbable that his meaning is, “and the circumference of Liburnia which joins it, with the Flanatic Gulf, some make 225, while others make the compass of Liburnia to be 180 miles.” It depends on the punctuation and the force of “item,” and the question whether the passage is not in a corrupt state; and it is not at all clear what his meaning really is.]; others again make the circumference of Liburnia 180 miles. Some persons too extend Iapydia, at the back of Istria, as far as the Flanatic Gulf, a distance of 130 miles, thus making Liburnia but 150 miles. Tuditanus [He alludes to C. Sempronius Tuditanus, Consul B.C. 129. He gained his victory over the Iapydes chiefly through the skill of his legatus, D. Junius Brutus. He was a distinguished orator and historian. He was the maternal grandfather of the orator Hortensius.], who subdued the Istri, had this inscription on his statue which was erected there: “From Aquileia to the river Titus is a distance of 1000 stadia.”

The towns of Istria with the rights of Roman citizens are Ægida [This place is only mentioned by Pliny, but from an inscription found, it appears that the emperor Justin II. conferred on it the title of Justinopolis. It is thought that it occupied the site of the present town of Capo d’Istria.—Parentium stood on the site of the present Parenzo.], Parentium, and the colony of Pola [It still retains its name.], now Pietas Julia, formerly founded by the Colchians, and distant from Tergeste 100 miles: after which we come to the town of Nesactium [Supposed to have occupied the site of the modern Castel Nuovo, past which the Arsia, now the Arsa, flows.], and the river Arsia, now [Since Istria had been added to it by Augustus.] the boundary of Italy. The distance across from Ancona to Pola is 120 miles. In the interior of the tenth region are the colonies of Cremona, Brixia in the territory of the Cenomanni [Livy seems to imply that Cremona was originally included in the territory of the Insubres. A Roman colony being established there it became a powerful city. It was destroyed by Antonius, the general of Vespasian, and again by the Lombard king Agilulfus in A.D. 605. No remains of antiquity, except a few inscriptions, are to be seen in the modern city.], Ateste [The modern city of Este stands on the site of Ateste. Beyond inscriptions there are no remains of this Roman colony.] belonging to the Veneti, and the towns of Acelum [Asolo stands on its site.], Patavium [It was said to have been founded by the Trojan Antenor. Under the Romans it was the most important city in the north of Italy, and by its commerce and manufactures attained great opulence. It was plundered by Attila, and, by Agilulfus, king of the Lombards, was razed to the ground. It was celebrated as being the birth-place of Livy. Modern Padua stands on its site, but has no remains of antiquity.], Opitergium, Belunum [Now called Belluno. Vicetia has been succeeded by the modern Vicenza.], and Vicetia; with Mantua [Mantua was not a place of importance, but was famous as being the birth-place of Virgil; at least, the poet, who was born at the village of Andes, in its vicinity, regarded it as such. It was said to have had its name from Manto, the daughter of Tiresias. Virgil, in the Æneid, B. x., alludes to its supposed Tuscan origin.], the only city of the Tuscans now left beyond the Padus. Cato informs us that the Veneti are descendants of the Trojans [Led by Antenor, as Livy says, B. i.], and that the Cenomanni [The Cenomanni, a tribe of the Cisalpine Gauls, seem to have occupied the country north of the Padus, between the Insubres on the west and the Veneti on the east. From Polybius and Livy we learn that they had crossed the Alps within historical memory, and had expelled the Etruscans and occupied their territory. They were signalized for their amicable feelings towards the Roman state.] dwelt among the Volcæ in the vicinity of Massilia. There are also the towns of the Fertini [Their town was Fertria or Feltria, the modern Feltre.], the Tridentini [The modern city of Trento or Trent occupies the site of Tridentum, their town. It is situate on the Athesis or Adige. It became famous in the middle ages, and the great ecclesiastical council met here in 1545.], and the Beruenses, belonging to the Rhæti, Verona [It was a Roman colony under the name of Colonia Augusta, having originally been the capital of the Euganei, and then of the Cenomanni. It was the birth-place of Catullus, and according to some accounts, of our author, Pliny. Modern Verona exhibits many remains of antiquity.], belonging to the Rhæti and the Euganei, and Julienses [D’Anville says that the ruins of this town are to be seen at the modern Zuglio.] to the Carni. We then have the following peoples, whom there is no necessity to particularize with any degree of exactness, the Alutrenses, the Asseriates, the Flamonienses [Hardouin thinks that their town, Flamonia, stood on the site of the modern Flagogna.] with those surnamed Vanienses, and the others called Culici, the Forojulienses [Their town, Forum Julii, a Roman colony, stood on the site of the modern Friuli. Paulus Diaconus ascribes its foundation to Julius Cæsar.] surnamed Transpadani, the Foretani, the Nedinates [Supposed by Miller to have inhabited the town now called Nadin or Susied.], the Quarqueni [Their town was probably on the site of the modern Quero, on the river Piave, below Feltre.], the Taurisani [Probably the same as the Tarvisani, whose town was Tarvisium, now Treviso.], the Togienses, and the Varvari. In this district there have disappeared—upon the coast—Iramene, Pellaon, and Palsatium, Atina and Cælina belonging to the Veneti, Segeste and Ocra to the Carni, and Noreia to the Taurisci. L. Piso also informs us that although the senate disapproved of his so doing, M. Claudius Marcellus [The conqueror of Syracuse. The fact here related probably took place in the Gallic war.] razed to the ground a tower situate at the twelfth mile-stone from Aquileia.

In this region also and the eleventh there are some celebrated lakes [This must be the meaning; and we must not, as Holland does, employ the number as signifying that of the lakes and rivers; for the Ticinus is in the eleventh region.], and several rivers that either take their rise in them or else are fed by their waters, in those cases in which they again emerge from them. These are the Addua [Now the Adda, running through Lago di Como, the Tesino through Lago Maggiore, the Mincio through Lago di Garda, the Seo through Lago di Seo, and the Lambro now communicating with the two small lakes called Lago di Pusiano and Lago d’Alserio, which in Pliny’s time probably formed one large lake.], fed by the Lake Larius, the Ticinus by Lake Verbannus, the Mincius by Lake Benacus, the Ollius by Lake Sebinnus, and the Lambrus by Lake Eupilis—all of them flowing into the Padus.

Cælius states that the length of the Alps from the Upper Sea to the Lower is 1000 miles, a distance which Timagenes shortens by twenty-two. Cornelius Nepos assigns to them a breadth of 100 miles, and T. Livius of 3000 stadia; but then in different places. For in some localities they exceed 100 miles; where they divide Germany, for instance, from Italy; while in other parts they do not reach seventy, being thus narrowed by the providential dispensation of nature as it were. The breadth of Italy, taken from the river Var at the foot of these mountains, and passing along by the Vada [Now Vado in Liguria, the harbour of Sabbata or Savo. Using the modern names, the line thus drawn runs past Vado, Turin, Como, Brescia, Verona, Vicenza, Oderzo, Aquileia, Trieste, Pola, and the Arsa.] Sabatia, the Taurini, Comum, Brixia, Verona, Vicetia, Opitergium, Aquileia, Tergeste, Pola, and Arsia, is 745 miles.

### Chap. 24. (20.)—The Alps, and the Alpine Nations.

Many nations dwell among the Alps; but the more remarkable, between Pola and the district of Tergeste, are the Secusses, the Subocrini, the Catali, the Menocaleni, and near the Carni the people formerly called the Taurisci, but now the Norici. Adjoining to these are the Rhæti and the Vindelici, who are all divided into a multitude of states. It is supposed that the Rhæti are the descendants of the Tuscans, who were expelled by the Gauls and migrated hither under the command of their chief, whose name was Rhætus. Turning then to the side of the Alps which fronts Italy, we have the Euganean [It is from this people that the group of volcanic hills between Padua and Verona derive their present name of Colli Euganei or the “Euganean Hills.” From the Triumpilini and the Camuni, the present Val Camonica and Val Trompia derive their names.] nations enjoying Latin rights, and of whom Cato enumerates thirty-four towns. Among these are the Triumpilini, a people who were sold [Probably meaning, that for a sum of money they originally acknowledged their subjection to the Roman power.] with their territory; and then the Camuni, and several similar tribes, each of them in the jurisdiction of its neighbouring municipal town. The same author also considers the Lepontii [The Lepontii probably dwelt in the modern Val Leventina and the Val d’Osula, near Lago Maggiore; the Salassi in the Val d’Aosta.] and the Salassi to be of Tauriscan origin, but most other writers, giving a Greek [Making it to come from the Greek verb λείπω, “to leave behind.”] interpretation to their name, consider the Lepontii to have been those of the followers of Hercules who were left behind in consequence of their limbs being frozen by the snow of the Alps. They are also of opinion that the inhabitants of the Grecian Alps are descended from a portion of the Greeks of his army, and that the Euganeans, being sprung from an origin so illustrious, thence took their name [As though being εὐγένειοι or εὐγενεῖς, “of honourable descent,” or “parentage.”]. The head of these are the Stœni [Strabo mentions the Stoni or Stœni among the minor Alpine tribes. Mannert thinks that they dwelt near the sources of the river Chiese, about the site of the modern village of Storo.]. The Vennonenses [It has been suggested that from them the modern Valtelline takes its name.] and the Sarunetes [Hardouin suggests that the Suanetes, who are again mentioned, are the people here meant.], peoples of the Rhæti, dwell about the sources of the river Rhenus, while the tribe of the Lepontii, known as the Uberi, dwell in the vicinity of the sources of the Rhodanus, in the same district of the Alps. There are also other native tribes here, who have received Latin rights, such as the Octodurenses [They are supposed to have dwelt in the present canton of Martignac in the Valais, and the Vaudois.], and their neighbours the Centrones [They dwelt in the Tarantaise, in the duchy of Savoy. The village called Centron still retains their name.], the Cottian [The states subject to Cottius, an Alpine chief, who having gained the favour of Augustus, was left by him in possession of this portion of the Alps, with the title of Præfect. These states, in the vicinity of the modern Mount Cenis, seem to have extended from Ebrodunum or Embrun in Gaul, to Segusio, the modern Susa, in Italy, including the Pass of Mont Genèvre. The territory of Cottius was united by Nero to the Roman empire, as a separate province called the “Alpes Cottiæ.”] states, the Ligurian Vagienni, descended from the Caturiges [They dwelt in the vicinity of Ebrodunum or Embrun already mentioned.], as also those called Montani [The “mountaineers.” Some editions read here “Appuani,” so called from the town of Appua, now Pontremoli.]; besides numerous nations of the Capillati [The Vagienni, and the Capillati Ligures, or “Long-haired Ligurians,” have been previously mentioned in Chap..], on the confines of the Ligurian Sea.

It may not be inappropriate in this place to subjoin the inscription now to be seen upon the trophy [The trophy or triumphal arch which bore this inscription is that which was still to be seen at Torbia near Nicæa in Illyria, in the time of Gruter, who has given that portion of the inscription which remained unobliterated, down to “gentes Alpinæ,” “the Alpine nations.” Hardouin speaks of another triumphal arch in honour of Augustus at Segusio or Susa in Piedmont, which appears to have commenced in a somewhat similar manner, but only the first twelve words were remaining in 1671.] erected on the Alps, which is to the following effect:—“ To the Emperor Cæsar—The son [Adopted son of his great uncle Julius Cæsar.] of Cæsar now deified, Augustus, Pontifex Maximus, and emperor fourteen years, in the seventeenth [Most of the MSS. omit the figures XVII here, but it is evidently an accident; if indeed they were omitted in the original.] year of his holding the tribunitial authority, the Senate and the Roman people, in remembrance that under his command and auspices all the Alpine nations which extended from the upper sea to the lower were reduced to subjection by the Roman people—The Alpine nations so subdued were: the Triumpilini, the Camuni, the Venostes [They are supposed to have occupied the Val Venosco, at the sources of the Adige. The Isarci dwelt in the Val de Sarra or Sarcha, near Val Camonica; and the Breuni in the Val Brounia or Bregna, at the source of the Tessino.], the Vennonenses, the Isarci, the Breuni, the Genaunes [D’Anville thinks that they inhabited the Val d’Agno, near Trento, between Lake Como and the Adige. He also detects the name of the Focunates in the village of Vogogna.], the Focunates, four nations of the Vindelici, the Consuanetes, the Rucinates, the Licates [They inhabited the banks of the river Lech, their town being, according to Strabo, Damasia, afterwards Augusta Vindelicorum, now Augsburg.], the Catenates, the Ambisontes, the Rugusci, the Suanetes [Probably the Sarunetes, already mentioned. The Brixentes inhabited the modern Brixen in the Tyrol. The Lepontii have been previously mentioned. The Seduni occupied the present Sion, the capital of the Valais. The Salassi have been already mentioned. According to Bouche, the Medulli occupied the modern Maurienne in Savoy. The Varagri dwelt in Le Chablais.], the Calucones, the Brixentes, the Lepontii, the Uberi, the Nantuates, the Seduni, the Varagri, the Salassi, the Acitavones, the Medulli, the Uceni [The Uceni, according to Hardouin, occupied Le Bourg d’Oysans in the modern Graisivaudan; the Caturiges, the modern Chorges according to Ansart; the Brigiani, probably Briançon, and the Nemaloni, as Hardouin thinks, the place called Miolans.], the Caturiges, the Brigiani, the Sogiontii, the Brodiontii, the Nemaloni, the Edenates [They probably dwelt in the Ville de Seyne, in Embrun; the Esubiani near the river Hubaye, in the Vallée de Barcelone in Savoy; the Veamini in Senez, the Triulatti at the village of Alloz, the Ecdini near the river Tinea, and the Vergunni in the vicinity of the district of Vergons.], the Esubiani, the Veamini, the Gallitæ, the Triulatti, the Ecdini, the Vergunni, the Eguituri [The Eguituri probably dwelt near the modern town of Guillaumes, the Oratelli at the place now called Le Puget de Théniers, and the Velauni near the modern Bueil.], the Nementuri, the Oratelli, the Nerusi, the Velauni, and the Suetri. ”

The twelve states of the Cottiani [Or subjects of Cottius, previously mentioned.] were not included in the list, as they had shown no hostility, nor yet those which had been placed by the Pompeian law under the jurisdiction of the municipal towns.

Such then is Italy, sacred to the gods, such are the nations, such the cities of her peoples; to which we may add, that this is that same Italy, which, when L. Æmilius Paulus [A mistake for L. Æmilius Papus. He and C. Regulus were Consuls in B.C. 225. They successfully opposed the Cisalpine Gauls, who invaded Italy; but Regulus was slain in the engagement.] and C. Attilius Regulus were Consuls, on hearing of the rising in Gaul, unaided, and without any foreign assistance whatever, without the help even of that portion which lies beyond the Padus, armed 80,000 horse and 700,000 foot. In abundance of metals of every kind Italy yields to no land whatever; but all search for them has been prohibited by an ancient decree of the Senate, who gave orders thereby that Italy shall be exempted [It is difficult to say what is the exact force of “parci” here; whether in fact it means that Italy shall be wholly exempted from such treatment, as an indignity offered to her soil, or whether her minerals were to be strictly kept in reserve as a last resource. Ajasson, in his Translation, seems to take the former view, Littré the latter.] from such treatment.

### Chap. 25. (21.)—Liburnia and Illyricum.

The nation of the Liburni adjoins the river Arsia [From the river now called the Arsa to that called the Kerka.], and extends as far as the river Titus. The Mentores, the Hymani [Hardouin thinks that “Ismeni” is the proper reading here; but all the MSS. seem to be against him.], the Encheleæ, the Buni, and the people whom Callimachus calls the Peucetiæ, formerly formed part of it; but now the whole in general are comprised under the one name of Illyricum. But few of the names of these nations are worthy of mention, or indeed very easy of pronunciation. To the jurisdiction of Scardona [Mentioned in the next Chapter.] resort the Iapydes and fourteen cities of the Liburni, of which it may not prove tedious if I mention the Lacinienses, the Stlupini, the Burnistæ, and the Olbonenses. Belonging to the same jurisdiction there are, in the enjoyment of Italian rights, the Alutæ [Their town was Aluus or Aloüs.], the Flanates [Their town was Flanona, which gave name to the Sinus Flanaticus or Golfo di Quarnero. The chief town of the Lopsi was Lopsica, and of the Varvarini, Varvaria.], from whom the Gulf takes its name, the Lopsi, and the Varvarini; the Assesiates, who are exempt from tribute; and upon the islands, the Fertinates and the Curictæ [The island of Fertina is supposed to have been the modern Berwitch or Parvich. Curicta is now called Karek or Veglia. The Illyrian snails mentioned by our author, B. ix. c. 56, are very numerous here. Caius Antonius, the brother of Marcus, acting under Julius Cæsar, was besieged here by Libo. See the interesting account in Lucan’s Pharsalia, B. iv. l. 402-464.].

Besides these, there are on the coast, after leaving Nesactium, Alvona [The places on their sites are now called Albona, Fianona, Tersact or Tersat near Fiume, Segna, Lopsico, Ortopia, and Veza.], Flanona, Tarsatica, Senia, Lopsica, Ortopula, Vegium, Argyruntum, Corinium [Now Carin. Ænona is now called Nona, and the Tedanius is the modern Zermagna.], Ænona, the city of Pasinum, and the river Tedanius, at which Iapydia terminates. The islands of this Gulf, with their towns, besides those above mentioned, are Absyrtium [The whole of this group of islands were sometimes called the Absyrtides, from Absyrtus, the brother of Medea, who according to tradition was slain there. See the last Chapter, p. 266. Ovid, however, in his “Tristia,” states that, this took place at Tomi, on the Pontus Euxinus or Black Sea, the place of his banishment.], Arba [Said by D’Anville to be now called Arbe, and Crexa to be the modern Cherso. Gissa is thought to have been the modern Pago.], Crexa, Gissa, and Portunata. Again, on the mainland there is the colony of Iadera [It was the capital of Liburnia. The city of Zara or Zara Vecchia stands on its site. There are but little remains of the ancient city.], distant from Pola 160 miles; then, at a distance of thirty miles, the island of Colentum [Supposed to be the present Mortero.], and of eighteen, the mouth of the river Titus.
