---
layout: book
title: "Chaps. 83-93."
chapter_order: 190
book: "Natural History"
author: "Pliny the Elder"
---

### Chap. 83. (13.)—Hippuris, Otherwise Called Ephedron, Anabasis, Ob Equisætum; Three Kinds of It: Eighteen Remedies.

Equisætum, a plant called “hippuris” by the Greeks, and which we have mentioned in terms of condemnation, when treating of meadow lands [In B. xviii. c. 67; where it is called “equisætis.” M. Fräas identifies it with the Equisætum limosum of Linnæus.] —it being, in fact, a sort of hair of the earth, similar in appearance to horse-hair [Whence its name “equisætum.”] —is used by runners for the purpose of diminishing [See B. xi. c. 30.] the spleen. For this purpose it is boiled down in a new earthen vessel to one third, the vessel being filled to the brim, and the decoction taken in doses of one hemina for three successive days. It is strictly forbidden, however, to eat any food of a greasy nature the day before taking it.

Among the Greeks there are various opinions in relation to this plant. According to some, who give it the same name of “hippuris,” it has leaves like those of the pine tree, and of a swarthy hue; and, if we are to believe them, it is possessed of virtues of such a marvellous nature, that if touched by the patient only, it will arrest hæmorrhage. Some authorities call it “hippuris,” others, again, “ephedron,” and others “anabasis;” and they tell us that it grows near trees, the trunks of which it ascends, and hangs down therefrom in numerous tufts of black, rush-like hair, much like a horse’s tail in appearance. The branches, we are told, are thin and articulated, and the leaves, few in number, small, and thin, the seed round, and similar to coriander in appearance, and the root ligneous: it grows, they say, in plantations more particularly.

This plant is possessed of astringent properties. The juice of it, kept in the nostrils, arrests bleeding therefrom, and it acts astringently upon the bowels. Taken in doses of three cyathi, in sweet wine, it is a cure for dysentery, is an efficient diuretic, and is curative of cough, hardness of breathing, ruptures, and serpiginous affections. For diseases of the intestines and bladder, the leaves are taken in drink; it has the property, also, of reducing ruptures of the groin.

The Greek writers describe another [Identified by Littré with the Ephedra fragilis of Linnæus. Fée gives as its synonym the Equisætum arvense of Linnæus, the Common horse-tail, or Corn horse-tail.] hippuris, also, with shorter tufts, softer and whiter. This last, they say, is remarkably good for sciatica, and, applied with vinegar, for wounds, it having the property of stanching the blood. Bruised nymphæa [See B. xxv. c. 37.] is also applied to wounds. Peucedanum [See B. xxv. c. 70.] is taken in drink with cypress seed, for discharges of blood at the mouth or by the lower passages. Sideritis [See B. xxv. c. 15.] is possessed of such remarkable virtues, that applied to the wound of a gladiator just inflicted, it will stop the flow of blood; an effect which is equally produced by an application of charred fennel-giant, or of the ashes of that plant. For a similar purpose, also, the fungus that is found growing near the root of fennel-giant is still more efficacious.

### Chap. 84.—Stephanomelis.

For bleeding at the nostrils, seed of hemlock, pounded in water is considered efficacious, as also stephanomelis, [Dalechamps identifies it with the Potentilla anserina of Linnæus, Silver-weed, or White tansy; but on insufficient grounds Fée thinks.] applied with water. Powdered betony, taken with goat’s milk, or bruised plantago, [See B. xxv. c. 39.] arrests discharges of blood from the mamillæ. Juice of plantago is administered to patients when vomiting blood. For local discharges of blood, an application of root of persolata [See B. xxv. c. 66.] with stale axle-grease is highly spoken of.

### Chap. 85.—Remedies for Ruptures and Convulsions. Erysithales: One Remedy.

For ruptures, convulsions, and falls with violence, the greater centaury [See B. xxv. c. 30.] is used; root of gentian pounded or boiled; juice of betony—this last being employed also for ruptures produced by straining the vocal organs or sides—panaces; [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] scordium; [See B. xxv. c. 27.] or aristolochia [See B. xxv. c. 54.] taken in drink. For contusions and falls, agaric is taken, in doses of two oboli, in three cyathi of honied wine, or if there are symptoms of fever, hydromel; the verbascum, [See B. xxv. c. 73.] also, with a golden flower; root of acoron; [See B. xxv. c. 100.] the several varieties of aizoüm, [See B. xxv. c. 102.] the juice of the larger kind being particularly efficacious; juice of symphytum, [See B. xxvii. c. 24.] or a decoction of the root of that plant; daucus, [See B. xxv. c. 64.] unboiled; erysithales, [C. Bauhin identifies it with the Cnicus erysithales of Willdenow; but that plant, Fée says, was unknown to the Greeks.] a plant with a yellow flower and a leaf like that of acanthus, taken in wine; chamærops; [See B. xxiv. c. 80.] irio, [See B. xviii. c. 10.] taken in pottage; plantago [See B. xxv. c. 39.] taken any way, as also \* \* \* \*

### Chap. 86.—Remedies for Phthiriasis.

Phthiriasis is a disease which proved fatal to the Dictator Sylla, [See B. xi. c. 39, and B. xx. c. 32.] and which developes itself by the production of insects in the blood, which ultimately consume the body. It is combated by using the juice of Taminian grapes [See B. xxiii. c. 13.] or of hellebore, the body being rubbed all over with it, in combination with oil. A decoction of Taminian grapes in vinegar, has the effect, also, of ridding the clothes of these vermin.

### Chap. 87. (14.)—Remedies for Ulcers and Wounds.

Of ulcers there are numerous kinds, which are treated in various ways. The root of all the varieties of panaces [See B. xxv. c. 11. et seq.] is used as an application for running ulcers, in warm wine.

That which we have spoken of as the “chironion” [See B. xxv. c. 15.] is particularly good as a desiccative: bruised with honey, it opens tumours, and is useful for serpiginous ulcers, the cure of which appears more than doubtful; in which case it is amalgamated with flower [For a description of this substance, see B. xxxiv. c. 24.] of copper tempered with wine, either the seed, flower, or root, being employed for the purpose. Mixed with polenta [See B. xviii. c. 14.] it is good for old wounds. The following are also good detergents for wounds: heraclion siderion, [See B. xxv. c. 15.] apollinaris, [See B. xxv. c. 17.] psyllion, [See B. xxv. c. 90.] tragacantha, [See B. xiii. c. 36.] and scordotis [See B. xxv. c. 27.] mixed with honey. Powdered scordotis, applied by itself, consumes fleshy excrescences on the body. Polemonia [See B. xxv. c. 28.] is curative of the malignant ulcer known as “cacoëthes.” The greater centaury, [See B. xxv. c. 30.] sprinkled in powder, or applied in the form of a liniment, or the leaves of the smaller [See B. xxv. c. 31.] centaury, boiled or pounded, act as a detergent upon inveterate ulcers, and effect a cure. To recent wounds, the follicules of the clymenus [See B. xxv. c. 33.] are applied. Gentian is applied to serpiginous ulcers, the root being bruised or else boiled down in water to the consistency of honey; the juice also of the plant is employed. For wounds, a kind of lycium [See B. xxiv. c. 77.] is prepared from gentian.

Lysimachia [See B. xxv. c. 35.] is curative of recent wounds, and plantago [See B. xxv. c. 39.] of all kinds of liberations, those on females, infants, and aged persons more particularly. This plant, when softened by the action of fire, is better still: in combination with cerate it acts as a detergent upon ulcers with indurated edges, and arrests the progress of corrosive sores: when applied bruised, it should be covered with its own leaves. Chelidonia [See B. xxv. c. 50.] also acts as a desiccative upon suppurations, abscesses, and fistulous ulcers; indeed, it is so remarkably useful for the cure of wounds, as to be employed as a substitute for spodium [See B. xix. c. 4, B. xxiii. c. 35, and B. xxxiv. c. 52.] even. In cases where the cure is almost hopeless, it is applied with axle-grease. Dittany, [See B. xxv. c. 53.] taken internally, causes arrows to fall from the flesh; used as a liniment, it has the effect of extracting other kinds of pointed weapons: the leaves are taken in the proportion of one obolus to one cyathus of water. Nearly equal in its efficacy is pseudo-dictamnon: [Bastard dittany. See B. xxv. c. 53.] they are both of them useful, also, for dispersing suppurations.

Aristolochia [See B. xxv. c. 66.] cauterizes putrid sores, and, applied with honey, acts as a detergent upon sordid ulcers. At the same time also, it removes maggots, and extracts hard cores, and all foreign bodies adhering to the flesh, arrows more particularly, and, applied with resin, splintered bones. Used by itself, it fills the cavities made by ulcers with new flesh, and, employed with iris, [See B. xxi. c. 19.] in vinegar, it closes recent wounds. Vervain, or cinquefoil with salt and honey, is remedial for ulcers of long standing. Roots of persolata [See B. xxv. c. 66.] are applied to recent wounds inflicted with iron, but for old wounds, it is the leaves that are employed: in both cases, in combination with axle-grease, the sore being then covered with the leaves of the plant. Damasonium [See B. xxv. c. 77.] is used for wounds the same way as for scrofula, [See c. 12 of this Book.] and leaves of verbascum [See B. xxv. c. 73.] are employed with vinegar or wine.

Vervain is useful for all kinds of callosities or putrid sores; root of nymphæa heraclia [See B. xxv. c. 37.] is curative of running ulcers; and the same is the case with root of cyclaminos, [See B. xxv. c. 67.] either used by itself, or in combination with vinegar or honey. This last root is useful also for the cure of steatomatous tumours, and hyssop for that of running ulcers; an effect equally produced by peucedanum, [See B. xxv. c. 70.] a plant which exercises so powerful an influence upon fresh wounds, as to cause exfoliation even of the bones. The two varieties of anagallis [See B. xxv. c. 92.] are possessed of similar properties, and act as a check upon the corrosive sores known as “nomæ” and upon defluxions; they are useful also in cases of recent wounds, those of aged people in particular. Fresh leaves of mandragora, [See B. xxv. c. 94.] applied with cerate, are curative of apostemes and sordid ulcers: the root too is used, with honey or oil, for wounds.

Hemlock, incorporated with flour of winter wheat [“Siligo.” See B. xviii. c. 20.] by the agency of wine—as also the plant aizoüm [See B. xxv. c. 102.] —is curative of herpetic eruptions, and corrosive or putrid sores. Erigeron [See B. xxv. c. 106.] is employed for ulcers which breed maggots. Root of astragalus [See c. 29 of this Book.] is used for the cure of recent wounds or of ulcers of long standing; and upon these last either kind of hypocisthis [See c. 31 of this Book.] acts as a detergent. Seed of leontopodium, [See B. xxvii. c. 72.] bruised in water and applied with polenta, [See B. xxviii. c. 14.] extracts pointed weapons from the flesh: a result equally produced by using seed of pycnocomon. [See c. 29 of this Book.] The tithyinalos characias [See c. 39 of this Book.] supplies its juice for the cure of gangrenes, phagedænic sores, and putrid ulcers; or else a decoction is made of the branches with polenta and oil. Boots of orchis [See c. 62 of this Book.] have a similar effect; in addition to which, applied, either dry or fresh gathered, with honey and vinegar, they are curative of the ulcer known as “cacoëthes.” Onothera [See c. 69 of this Book.] also, used by itself, is curative of ulcers when rapidly gaining head.

The people of Scythia employ scythice [Our “liquorice,” See B. xxv. c. 43.] for the treatment of wounds. For carcinoma, argemonia, [See B. xxv. c. 66.] applied with honey, is extremely efficacious. For sores that have prematurely closed, root of asphodel is boiled, in manner already [In B. xxii c. 33.] stated and then beaten up with polenta, [See B. xviii. c. 14.] and applied. For all kinds of wounds apollinaris [See B. xxv. c. 17.] is very useful. Root of astragalus, [See c. 29 of this Book.] reduced to powder, is good for running ulcers; the same, too, with callithrix, [See B. xxii. c. 30, and B. xxv. c. 86.] boiled in water. For blisters, more particularly when caused by the shoes, vervain is used, as also pounded lysimachia, [See B. xxv. c. 35.] or nymphæa [See B. xxv. c. 37.] dried and powdered; but when they have assumed the form of inveterate ulcers, polythrix [See Note 46 above.] will be found more serviceable.

### Chap. 88.—Polycnemon: One Remedy.

Polycnemon [Desfontaines identifies it with the Mentha cervina, or Stag mint.] is a plant which resembles cunila bubula; [See B. xix. c. 50, and B. xx. c. 61.] it has a seed like that of pennyroyal, a ligneous stem with numerous articulations, and odoriferous umbels, with a pleasant though pungent smell. This plant is chewed and applied to wounds inflicted with iron, the application being removed at the end of four days. Symphyton [See B. xxvii. c. 24.] causes sores to cicatrize with the greatest rapidity; the same, too, with sideritis, [See B. xxv. c. 19.] which is applied in combination with honey. The seed and leaves of verbascum, [See B. xxv. c. 73.] boiled in wine and pounded, are used for the extraction of all foreign substances adhering to the body; and a similar use is made of leaves of mandragora [See B. xxv. c. 94.] mixed with polenta, [See B. xvii. c. 14.] and roots of cyclaminos [See B. xxv. c. 67.] with honey. Leaves of trixago, [See B. xxiv. c. 80.] bruised in oil, are used for ulcers of a serpiginous nature more particularly, as also sea-weed bruised with honey. Betony, with the addition of salt, is employed for the cure of carcinomatous sores and inveterate blisters on the neck.

### Chap. 89.—Remedies Fob Warts, and Applications for the Removal of Scars.

Argemonia [See B. xxv. c. 56.] with vinegar, or root of batrachion, [See B. xxv. c. 109.] removes warts; this last having the effect also of bringing off malformed nails. The juice or the leaves, applied topically, of either kind of linozostis, [See B. xxv. c. 18.] remove warts. All the varieties of tithymalos [See c. 39 of this Book, et seq.] are efficacious for the removal of every kind of wart, as also of hangnails [“Pterygia.”] and wens. Ladanum [See B. xii. c. 37 and c. 30 of this Book.] imparts a fresh colour and seemly appearance to scars.

(15.) The traveller who carries artemisia [See B. xxv. c. 81.] attached to his person, or elelisphacus, [See B. xxii. c. 71.] will never be sensible of lassitude, it is said.

### Chap. 90.—Remedies for Female Diseases.

One great remedy for all female diseases in common, is the black seed of the herbaceous plant pæonia, [See B. xxv. c, 10.] taken in hydromel: the root also is an effectual emmenagogue. Seed of panaces, [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] mixed with wormwood, acts as an emmenagogue and as a sudorific: the same, too, with scordotis, [See B. xxv. c. 27.] taken internally or applied topically. Betony, in doses of one drachma to three cyathi of wine, is taken for various affections of the uterus, as also directly after child-birth. Excessive menstruation is arrested by a pessary of achillea, [See B. xxv. c. 19.] or else a sitting-bath composed of a decoction of that plant. Seed of henbane in wine is used as a liniment for diseases of the mamillæ, and the root is employed in the form of a plaster for uterine affections; chelidonia, [See B. xxv. c. 50.] too, is applied to the mamillæ.

Roots of panaces, [See B. xxv. c. 11, et seq.] applied as a pessary, bring away the after-birth and the dead fœtus, and the plant itself, taken in wine, or used as a pessary with honey, acts as a detergent upon the uterus. Polemonia, [See B. xxv. c. 28.] taken in wine, brings away the after-birth; used as a fumigation, it is good for suffocations of the uterus. Juice of the smaller centaury, [See B. xxv. c. 31.] taken in drink, or employed as a fomentation, acts as an emmenagogue. The root also of the larger centaury, similarly used, is good for pains in the uterus; scraped and used as a pessary, it expels the dead fœtus. For pains of the uterus, plantago [See B. xxv. c. 39.] is applied as a pessary, in wool, and for hysterical suffocations, it is taken in drink. But it is dittany that is of the greatest efficacy in cases of this description; it acts as an emmenagogue, and is an expellent of the fœtus when dead or lying transversely in the uterus. In these cases the leaves of it are taken, in doses of one obolus, in water: indeed so active is it in its effects that ordinarily it is forbidden to be introduced into the chamber of a woman lying-in. Not only is it thus efficacious when taken in drink, but even when applied topically or used as a fumigation. Pseudodictamnum [“Bastard dittany.” See B. xxv. c. 53] possesses pretty nearly the same virtues, but it acts as an emmenagogue also, boiled in doses of one denarius in unmixed wine. Aristolochia, [See B. xxv. c. 54.] however, is employed for a greater number of purposes: in combination with myrrh and pepper, either taken in drink or used as a pessary, it acts as a powerful emmenagogue, and brings away the dead fœtus and the after-birth. This plant, the smaller kind in particular, used either as a fomentation, fumigation, or pessary, acts as a preventive of procidence of the uterus.

Hysterical suffocations and irregularities of the catamenia are treated with agaric, taken in doses of three oboli, in one cyathus of old wine: vervain is used also in similar cases, as a pessary, with fresh hog’s lard; or else antirrhinum, [See B. xxv. c. 80.] with rose, oil and honey. Root of Thessalian nymphæa, [See B. xxv. c. 37.] used as a pessary, is curative of pains in the uterus; taken in red wine, it arrests uterine discharges. Root of cyclaminos, [See B. xxv. c. 67.] on the other hand, taken in drink and employed as a pessary, acts as an emmenagogue: a decoction of it, used as a sitting-bath, cures affections of the bladder. Cissanthemos, [See B. xxv. c. 68.] taken in drink, brings away the after-birth, and is curative of diseases of the uterus. The upper part of the root of xiphion, [See B. xxv. c. 88.] taken in doses of one drachma, in vinegar, promotes menstruation. A fumigation of burnt peucedanum [See B. xxv. c. 70.] has a soothing effect in cases of hysterical suffocation. Psyllion, [See B. xxv. c. 90.] taken in the proportion of one drachma to three cyathi of hydromel, is particularly good for promoting the lochial discharge. Seed of mandragora, [See B. xxv. c. 94.] taken in drink, acts as a detergent upon the uterus; the juice, employed in a pessary, promotes menstruation and expels the dead fœtus. The seed of this plant, used with live sulphur, [See B. xxxv. c. 50.] arrests menstruation when in excess; while batrachion, [See B. xxv. c. 109.] on the other hand, acts as an emmenagogue. This last plant is either used as an article of food, or is taken in drink: in a raw state, as already stated, [In B. xxv. c. 109.] it has a burning flavour; but when cooked, the taste of it is greatly improved by the addition of salt, oil, and cummin. Daucus, [See B. xxv. c. 64.] taken in drink, promotes the catamenia, and is an expellent of the after-birth in a very high degree. Ladanum, [See B. xii. c. 37, and c. 30 of this Book.] used as a fumigation, acts as a corrective upon the uterus, and is employed topically for pains and ulcerations of that organ.

Scammony, taken in drink or used as a pessary, is an expellent of the dead fœtus. Either kind of hypericon, [See Chapters 53 and 54 of this Book.] used as a pessary, promotes menstruation: but for this purpose it is crethmos, [See B. xxv. c. 96.] according to Hippocrates, that is the most efficacious, the seed or root of it being taken in wine. [Probably the word “juice,” or “decoction,” is lost here.] \* \* \* of the outer coat brings away the after-birth. This plant, taken in water, is good for hysterical suffocations; root of geranion [See c. 68 of this Book.] also, which is peculiarly useful for the after-birth, and for inflation of the uterus. Hippuris, [See Chapters 20 and 83 of this Book.] taken in drink or applied as a pessary, acts as a detergent upon the uterus: polygonos, [See B. xxvii. c. 91.] taken in drink, promotes menstruation; and the same with root of alcima. [The same as “Alcea” probably; see Chapters 79 and 81 of this Book. Also B. xxvii. c. 6.] Leaves of plantago, [See B. xxv. c. 39.] and agaric in hydromel, have a similar effect. Artemisia, [See B. xxv. c. 36.] bruised and applied as a pessary, with oil of iris, [See B. xiii. c. 2, and B. xxi. cc. 19, 83.] figs, or myrrh, is curative of diseases of the uterus; the root, too, of this plant, taken in drink, is so strongly purgative as to expel the dead fœtus even. A decoction of the branches, used as a sitting-bath, promotes menstruation and brings away the after-birth; the same too, with the leaves, taken in doses of one drachma in drink. The leaves, if applied to the lower regions of the abdomen with barley-meal, will prove equally efficacious.

Acoron [See B. xxv. c. 100.] is very useful for internal complaints of females; as also the two varieties of conyza, [See B. xxi. c. 29.] and crethmos. [See B. xxv. c. 96.] Either kind of anthyllis, [See B. xxi. c. 103.] taken in wine, is remarkably good for uterine affections, griping pains in that organ, and retardations of the after-birth. Callithrix, [See B. xxii. c. 30, and B. xxv. c. 86.] applied as a fomentation, is curative of affections of the vagina: it removes scaly eruptions [“Albugines.”] also of the head, and, beaten up in oil, it stains the hair. Geranion, [See c. 68 of this Book.] taken in white wine, or hypocisthis [See c. 31 of this Book.] in red, arrests all uterine discharges. Hyssop modifies hysterical suffocations. Root of vervain, taken in water, is a most excellent remedy for all accidents incident to, or consequent upon, delivery. Some persons mix bruised cypress seed with peucedanum [See B. xxv. c. 70.] in red wine. Seed, too, of psyllion, [See B. xxv. c. 90.] boiled in water and taken warm, has a soothing effect upon all defluxions of the uterus. Symphyton, [See B. xxvii. c. 24.] bruised in wine, promotes menstruation. Juice of scordotis, [See B. xxv. c. 27.] in the proportion of one drachma to four cyathi of hydromel, accelerates delivery. Leaves of dittany are given for the same purpose, in water, with remarkable success. It is a well-known fact, too, that these leaves, to the extent of a single obolus even, will bring away the fœtus instantaneously, even when dead, without the slightest inconvenience to the patient. Pseudodictamnum [See B. xxv. c. 53.] is productive of a somewhat similar effect, but not in so marked a degree: cyclaminos, [See B. xxv. c. 67.] too, attached as an amulet; cissanthemos, [See B. xxv. c. 68.] taken in drink; and powdered betony, in hydromel.

### Chap. 91.—Arsenogonon: One Medicinal Property. Thelygonon: One Medicinal Property.

Arsenogonon [These two plants, the names of which signify “begetting males,” and “begetting females,” are identified by Fée as the male and the female of the same plant, the Mercurialis tomentosa of Linnæus, the Woolly mercury. Littré gives the Mercurialis perennis of Linnæus, Dog’s mercury; and Desfontaines identifies them with the Thelygonum cynocrambe.] and thelygonon are plants, both of them, with clusters resembling the blossoms of the olive, but paler, and a white seed like that of the poppy. By taking thelygonon in drink, they say, the conception of female issue is ensured. Arsenogonon differs from it in the seed, which resembles that of the olive, but in no other respect. By taking this last plant in drink, male issue may be ensured—that is, if we choose to believe it. Some persons, however, assert that both plants resemble ocimum, [See B. xxi. c. 60.] but that the seed of arsenogonon is double, and resembles the testes in appearance.

### Chap. 92.—Mastos: One Remedy.

Aizoüm, which we have spoken of under the name of digitellus, [In B. xxv. c. 102.] is the great specific for diseases of the mamillæ. The milk is increased by taking erigeron [See B. xxv. c. 106.] in raisin wine, or else sonchos [See B. xxii. c. 44.] boiled with spelt. The plant known as “mastos,” [Meaning the “breast” plant. It has not been identified.] applied topically, removes the hairs from the mamillæ, [See B. xxxii. c. 10.] which make their appearance after child-birth: it has the effect also of dispersing scaly crusts [“Testas.”] upon the face, and other cutaneous affections. Gentian also, nymphæa heraclia [See B. xxv. c. 37.] employed in a liniment, and root of cyclaminos, [See B. xxv. c. 67.] remove all blemishes of the skin. Seeds of cacalia, [See B. xxv. c. 85.] mixed with melted wax, plump out the skin of the face and make wrinkles disappear. Root of acoron, [See B. xxv. c. 100.] also, removes all spots upon the skin.

### Chap. 93.—Applications for the Hair. Lysimachia. Ophrys.

Lysimachia [See B. xxv. c. 35.] imparts a blonde tint [The most highly esteemed among the Romans of all colours of the hair.] to the hair, and the hypericon, [See Chapter 53 of this Book.] otherwise called “corisson,” makes it black. The same too, with ophrys, [The “eye-brow” plant. It is identified by Fée with the Ophrys ovata or bifolia of Linnæus, Ivy blade. The indentations in the leaves are almost imperceptible.] a plant with indentations, which resembles the cabbage, but has only two leaves. Polemonia, [See B. xxv. c. 28.] too, boiled in oil, imparts blackness to the hair.

As for depilatories, I reckon them in the number of cosmetics, fit for women only, though men use them now-a-days. For this purpose archezostis [See B. xxvi. c. 70.] is looked upon as highly efficacious, as also juice of tithymalos, [See c. 39 of this Book, et seq.] applied with oil every now and then in the sun, or after pulling out the hairs. Hyssop, applied with oil, heals itch-scab in beasts, and sideritis [See B. xxv. c. 19] is particularly useful for quinzy in swine.

But let us now turn to the remaining plants of which we have to speak.

Summary.—Remedies, narratives, and observations, one thousand and nineteen.

Roman authors quoted.—M. Varro, [See end of B. ii.] C. Valgius, [See end of B. xx.] Pompeius Lenæus, [See end of B. xiv.] Sextius Niger [See end of B. xii.] who wrote in Greek, Julius Bassus [See end of B. xx.] who wrote in Greek, Antonius Castor, [See end of B. xx.] Cornelius Celsus. [See end of B. vii.]

Foreign authors quoted.—Theophrastus, [See end of B. iii.] Democritus, [See end of B. ii.] Juba, [See end of B. v.] Orpheus, [See end of B. xx.] Pythagoras, [See end of B. ii.] Mago, [See end of B. viii.] Menander [See end of B. xix.] who wrote the “Biochresta,” Nicander, [See end of B. viii.] Homer, Hesiod, [See end of B. vii.] Musæus, [See end of B. xxi.] Sophocles, [See end of B. xxi.] Xanthus, [See end of B. xxv.] Anaxilaüs. [See end of B. xxi.]

Medical authors quoted.—Mnesitheus, [See end of B. xxi.] Callimachus, [See end of B. iv.] Phanias [See end of B. xxi.] the physician, Timaristus, [See end of B. xxi.] Simus, [See end of B. xxi.] Hippocrates, [See end of B. vii.] Chrysippus, [See end of B. xx.] Diocles, [See end of B. xx.] Ophelion, [See end of B. xx.] Heraclides, [See end of B. xii.] Hicesius, [See end of B. xv.] Dionysius, [See end of B. xii.] Apollodorus [See end of B. xx.] of Citium, Apollodorus [See end of B. xx.] of Tarentum, Praxagoras [See end of B. xx.] Plistonieus, [See end of B. xx.] Medius, [See end of B. xx.] Dieuches, [See end of B. xx.] Cleophantus, [See end of B. xx.] Philistion, [See end of B. xx.] Asclepiades, [See end of B. vii.] Crateuas, [See end of B. xx.] Petronius Diadotus, [See end of B. xx.] Iollas, [See end of B. xii.] Erasistratus, [See end of B. xi.] Diagoras, [See end of B. xii.] Andreas, [See end of B. xx.] Mnesides, [See end of B. xii.] Epicharmus [See end of B. xx.] Damion, [See end of B. xx.] Tlepolemus, [See end of B. xx.] Metrodorus, [See end of B. xx.] Solo, [See end of B. xx.] Lycus, [See end of B. xii.] Olympias [See end of B. xx.] of Thebes, Philinus, [See end of B. xx.] Petrichus, [See end of B. xix.] Micton, [See end of B. xx.] Glaucias, [See end of B. xx.] Xenocrates. [See end of B. xx.]
